1	Accipitridae	Hawks, Kites, Eagles and Allies	Hawks,Kites, Eagles and Allies	Although this is a large and varied family, its members share many similarities. They are all diurnal hunters and, for the most part, use their sharp vision to locate prey, which they capture with strong feet. Many members of this family are migratory, and they often concentrate along major migration corridors. These migration corridors often follow ridgelines, where the birds ride updrafts to facilitate their journey south. Like other birds of prey, female hawks et al. are larger than males. Most members of this family are monogamous, and many form long-term pair bonds. Females generally incubate the eggs and brood the young, with some assistance from the male. The male brings food to the nest. Once the young no longer need to be brooded, both parents bring food. Extended parental care is the norm for this group, as it takes a relatively long time for young to learn to hunt.	1
2	Aegithalidae	Long-tailed Tits and Bushtits	Bushtits	The family of long-tailed tits is made up of very small birds with moderately long tails. The Bushtit is the only member of this group found in North America. Most inhabit shrubs and open woodlands where they glean insects from leaves and other surfaces. Flocking is the norm for this group. Most are monogamous during the breeding season, but pair bonds rarely persist from year to year. They are generally non-migratory. The pendulous nest of the Bushtit is typical for this family. Generally both members of the pair provide parental care: building the nest, incubating, brooding, and feeding are all conducted by both sexes.	13
3	Alaudidae	Larks	Larks	Ground-dwelling songbirds of the open country, larks are mostly an Old World family.  Most are well camouflaged and adapted to grassland or dry soil habitats.  In most species, only the female incubates, but both parents tend and feed the young. Most larks have striking flight-song displays. Larks sing while flying high into the air, advertising, and defending their territories.  The Horned Lark is the only lark native to Washington, but the Sky Lark, introduced from Eurasia, formerly bred here.	13
4	Alcedinidae	Kingfishers	Kingfishers	Kingfishers typically have crested heads and long, sturdy bills. Although only a handful of species are found in the Western Hemisphere and only one makes it as far north as Washington, there are far more species in other parts of the world. Many have brightly colored plumage. Kingfishers plunge into the water from above to catch fish and other aquatic creatures in their bills. Their partially fused toes may aid them in digging nest burrows.	7
5	Alcidae	Auks, Murres and Puffins	Auks, Murres and Puffins	Alcids are diving seabirds of the Northern Hemisphere.  Most are more comfortable in and under the water than in the air.  While some members of the family fly long distances in post-breeding dispersal or migration, others fly only with effort. Underwater, they use their wings as flippers to swim after fish, krill, and other aquatic prey. The majority nest in colonies on islands, and many are active in these colonies only at night, spending the day foraging on open water far from their nesting sites.  Many nest in burrows, and most species lay only one egg each year, although some lay two.  Both sexes incubate and care for the young.  Most alcids are predominantly black-and-white, with different breeding and non-breeding plumages.	5
6	Anatidae	Ducks, Geese and Swans	Ducks, Geese and Swans	The waterfowl family is represented in Washington by two distinct groups&#8212;the geese and swans, and the ducks. Whistling-ducks are also considered a distinct subfamily, and, although they have not been sighted in Washington in many years, Fulvous Whistling-Ducks have been recorded historically in Washington and remain on the official state checklist. All members of the waterfowl family have large clutches of precocial young. They hatch covered in down and can swim and eat on their own almost immediately after hatching.	2
7	Apodidae	Swifts	Swifts	Swifts are fast flyers that forage in the air for flying insects. They have streamlined bodies, long, narrow wings, and short, wide bills that they open wide when foraging. Their feet are very small, and all four toes face forward, making them unable to perch on twigs; thus they cling to vertical surfaces when not in flight. Social birds, many swifts forage and nest in groups. They nest in out-of-the-way cavities, chimneys, and crevices, and attach their half-saucer nests to the inside of these areas with sticky saliva. Clutch size is variable among species, and both parents care for the young.	3
8	Ardeidae	Herons, Bitterns and Allies	Herons, Bitterns and Allies	Herons and egrets are wading birds that generally inhabit wetlands and slow-moving waters. Most are long-legged, and they hunt by waiting motionless, peering into the water, watching for prey.  The majority are colony nesters, often raising young in colonies of mixed species.  Monogamy is the norm, although pair bonds usually last for a single breeding season.  Both parents help build the nest. Typically, the male brings material, and the female constructs the nest, which is usually built of sticks.  Both parents incubate, and both feed the young by regurgitation.	14
9	Bombycillidae	Waxwings	Waxwings	Waxwings are sleek songbirds with pointed wings and unique, waxy, red tips at the ends of their secondary feathers.  Waxwings specialize in sugary fruit, especially berries.  They generally inhabit open woods and edges, and have become more common in developed areas because of ornamental plantings that provide berries.  They also eat insects, which they often catch by flying out from exposed perches.  Waxwings are social and are usually found in flocks regardless of season.  These birds are migratory, but are quite nomadic in their movements.  They are monogamous and often nest in loose colonies.  Females generally build the nest and incubate the young. This family has only three species: the Bohemian Waxwing, a Holarctic species, found across northern Eurasia and North America; the Cedar Waxwing, which nests in North America and winters to South America; and the Japanese Waxwing in East Asia.	13
10	Calcariidae	Longspurs and snow-buntings	Longspurs and snow-buntings	Formerly assigned to the family Emberizidae (typically known as buntings in the Old World and sparrows in the New World)	13
11	Caprimulgidae	Goatsuckers	Nighthawks and Poorwills	These unusual-looking birds have flat heads and very short bills with extremely wide gapes. Many have rictal bristles around their beaks; these specialized feathers may help funnel prey into their mouths as they forage for flying insects.  Many swallow stones as grit to help grind up the hard exoskeletons of their insect prey.  They have large, dark eyes that reflect light, and they are often spotted on roadsides when their eyes shine from car headlights.  They generally have long wings and maneuver well in flight.  Although they spend much time on the ground, they have short legs and small, weak feet.  When perching on tree limbs, they usually perch lengthwise along the branch, not crosswise like most birds.  They do not usually build nests, but lay two eggs on the bare ground. Both parents help raise the young.	4
12	Cardinalidae	Cardinals, Saltators and Allies	Grosbeaks, Buntings and Allies	This group, the cardinalids, is made up of medium-sized songbirds that primarily inhabit open areas and woodland edges.  The family is tropical in origin and restricted to the Americas.  Northern-breeding members generally have strong sexual dimorphism: adult males are brightly colored, while females are drab.  They are seedeaters and have powerful, conical bills that can crack seeds. These birds also eat fruit and insects.  Most of those that breed in the northern temperate zone are migratory and monogamous.  The common names of several species in the Cardinalidae family can be confusing, because some birds that are called buntings or grosbeaks belong to different families.  Snow Bunting, McKay&#8217;s Bunting, and Rustic Bunting are actually members of the Emberizidae, and Evening Grosbeak belongs to the Fringillidae.	13
13	Cathartidae	New World Vultures	New World Vultures	The family name, Cathartidae, comes from the Greek word for cleanser, and that is exactly the function these scavengers serve&#8212;cleaning dead animals from the land. They are often seen soaring overhead, looking for dead animals to eat. Their bald heads help them stay clean when eating carrion. These sociable birds often gather in communal roosts at night and will gather to feed around large carcasses. Their nesting sites are usually far removed from the disturbance of humans. They generally lay two eggs, which both parents help incubate. They regurgitate ingested food for their young.	1
14	Certhiidae	Creepers	Creepers	Of the seven species in the creeper family, only one can be found in North America. All seven species, however, are similar in appearance, habitat, and behavior. They all eat primarily invertebrates that they glean from tree bark. Creepers are monogamous breeders, and nests are similar in all species. The females generally incubate the eggs, and both parents bring food and care for the young.	13
15	Charadriidae	Lapwings and Plovers	Plovers	Plovers are small to medium-sized shorebirds with round heads, short bills, large eyes, and short necks.  They live on the ground in open habitats, mostly near water.  They build a simple scrape nest on the ground, in which they lay 3&#8211;4 eggs.  Both parents incubate and care for the young, although newly hatched chicks walk and feed themselves soon after hatching.  Plovers eat small invertebrates, and their foraging style is what sets them apart from other shorebirds.  Plovers are visual feeders: while foraging, they run, pause, eat, run, and pause repeatedly. This upright style contrasts with that of sandpipers, which are most often seen head down, probing for underground prey.  Plovers also typically do not nest as far to the north as most sandpipers and do not migrate as far.	5
16	Cinclidae	Dippers	Dippers	Dippers are songbirds, but live an aquatic life.  They live in and around fast-moving, rocky-bottomed streams, and eat insects and other small invertebrates that they take from the bottoms of these streams.  Dippers can walk under water and dive and swim against strong currents.  They use their wings as paddles under the water and have dense plumage that helps keep them warm in cold water.  Of the five species worldwide in this group, most are monogamous, and most are resident or migrate only short distances.  Their nests are covered domes, usually with an outer lining of moss.  Females generally incubate the eggs, and males help with other parental duties.	13
17	Columbidae	Pigeons and Doves	Pigeons and Doves	Most of the members of this group live in tropical or semi-tropical parts of the world.  The term "pigeon" refers to the larger and "dove" to the smaller species in this group, although this usage is not consistent.  Most pigeons and doves have plump bodies and soft plumage. The Washington members of this group are drab, but some have iridescent patches. Pigeons and doves are all strong fliers.  One unique trait of this family is the ability to drink without tipping the head back, something no other bird can do. Pigeons and doves feed on seeds and fruits. Unlike many granivorous birds that switch to a diet of insects when raising young, pigeons have a unique system for feeding their young. Both males and females produce in their crops a protein- and fat-rich liquid called "pigeon milk," which they feed to their young. Most pigeons and doves lay clutches of one or two eggs.	6
18	Corvidae	Crows & Jays	Crows, Jays and Allies	The crows, jays, and allies are intelligent and crafty birds.  They are opportunistic, and most thrive living among humans.  For this reason, many have been persecuted as pests.  Many members of this family cache, or store, food for the winter, which allows them to be year-round residents at high altitudes and in northern climates.  Many live in forests, and most nest in trees.  Crows, ravens, magpies, and jays are generally long-lived and monogamous, and form long-term pair bonds.  Some species have helpers at the nest.  Their nests are typically bulky and made from sticks, and both sexes generally help build them.  Females incubate the young, but there are exceptions where the male helps.  Both sexes usually feed and care for the young.  The corvids are omnivores, eating seeds, nuts, insects, carrion, and small vertebrates. They often rob the nests of other birds of eggs and nestlings.  Most are social, forming flocks, especially outside the breeding season.	13
19	Cuculidae	Cuckoos, Roadrunners and Anis	Cuckoos	The cuckoo family is a diverse family of birds with no close relatives. The majority of this family resides in the Old World, where many members are parasitic, laying their eggs in the nests of other birds.  The cuckoos and allies that live in North America are less likely to parasitize nests, but some may occasionally do so.  Most are omnivores that live and forage in dense foliage and can be hard to see.  They are typically monogamous, with both members of the pair helping to rear the young.	8
20	Diomedeidae	Albatrosses	Albatrosses	The albatrosses are large seabirds with very long wings. They have a unique flight, soaring on the wind currents above the waves, hardly ever flapping their wings, possibly even sleeping on the wing. This flight requires strong winds, and in the absence of these winds, they will be found swimming on the water's surface. They also forage on the surface of the water; some may dive under water, while others dabble at the surface.  Albatrosses may live a very long time, more than 40 or 50 years in some cases. The majority of albatrosses live in the Southern Hemisphere and breed during the southern spring and summer. Even those that breed in the Northern Hemisphere breed during our winter. Two separate tubes are located on either side of the albatross's bill.	18
21	Emberizidae	Emberizids	Sparrows, Towhees, Longspurs and Allies	The Emberizidae family is made up of the New World sparrows, longspurs, and some of the buntings.  Most forage and nest on the ground.  Most emberizids are seedeaters and have short, thick bills adapted for this diet, although they all eat insects and other arthropods at times, and feed them to their young. They are typically monogamous. Females generally build the nests and incubate the eggs and young, but both parents feed the young. Clutches are small, generally three to five eggs.  Many of these birds are small, brown, and streaked, and stay close to cover, making identification challenging.	13
22	Falconidae	Caracaras and Falcons	Falcons and Allies	This widespread and diverse family of predatory birds is divided into two groups. Some of the fastest-flying birds can be found in the <I>falcon</I> group. Built for speed, most falcons have pointed wings and long tails. Many catch avian prey in flight, but others prey on large insects, mammals, and ground-dwelling birds. Members of the <I>caracara</I> group are more opportunistic, taking carrion as well as live prey and often foraging on the ground. Regardless of the approach, members of this family almost always use their feet to catch prey. Like other birds of prey, females are larger than males. They are generally monogamous and form long-term pair bonds. Some caracaras build stick nests in trees, but most species in this family nest on cliffs, in other birds' nests, or in cavities, and typically do not add any nesting material. The female generally incubates the eggs and broods the young, while the male brings food to the nest. Once the young no longer need to be brooded, both parents bring food. Extended parental care is the norm for this family, as it takes a relatively long time for the young to learn to hunt. In Washington, one species from this family belongs to the caracara group, while the others are true falcons.	9
23	Fregatidae	Frigatebirds	Frigatebirds	Frigatebirds are large, lightweight birds.  All five species in this family are mostly black, with long, pointed wings and tails and long, hooked bills.  They are exceptional gliders and can hang in the air for hours without flapping their wings.  Because they cannot take off from the water, they do not swim, but they will dip down to the water's surface and grab food, or steal food from other birds.  They typically eat flying fish, squid, jellyfish, and other sea creatures at the water's surface.  They are not migratory but may wander widely, and generally land on islands or shoreline trees to rest.   They are colonial nesters, and males display by inflating large throat pouches.  Frigatebirds are one of few seabirds that are sexually dimorphic: females generally have more white on their mostly-black plumage, and are about 24 percent larger than males.  Females build nests with materials gathered by males, and both sexes help incubate and feed a single chick.  Frigatebirds are long-lived birds with prolonged nesting cycles.  Young can be dependent on the adults for up to two years, and do not begin to nest until they are between five and 11 years old.  Once they begin breeding, they nest once every one to four years.	21
24	Fringillidae	Fringilline and Cardueline Finches and Allies	Finches and Allies	The finch family is made up of acrobatic seedeaters with conical bills and notched tails.  Many are nomadic, wandering in winter in search of abundant seeds.  Most finch species flock outside the breeding season, and many form flocks during the breeding season as well.  Many finches have undulating flight patterns, and may give calls while in flight.  They tend to inhabit forest patches and shrubby edges.  Most finch species are sexually dimorphic and monogamous, and although the females alone generally incubate the eggs, both sexes help tend the young. Unlike many seed-eating birds that feed protein-rich insects to their young, many finches feed their young mostly seeds.	13
25	Gaviidae	Loons	Loons	Called "divers" in much of the world, loons are large aquatic birds of the north and far north. Males and females look alike, and have distinct breeding and non-breeding plumages. All species nest on fresh water but are found most commonly in winter on salt water. Both parents participate in raising the young. There are only five species of loons worldwide, and all five have been seen in Washington.	11
26	Gruidae	Cranes	Cranes	Fifteen species of cranes make up this distinct, worldwide family, which has no close relatives. Members of this group are large, walk slowly along the ground, and fly with their long necks fully extended. Outside of the nesting season, most cranes gather in large flocks. Many species are migratory and will migrate in large groups, resting at the same stopover sites year after year. The young do not know their migratory routes instinctively, and learn them from their parents and other adult birds. Cranes are long-lived birds, and many live for 20&#8211;30 years. Most are omnivores associated with wetlands. Pair bonds are monogamous and long-term, and both parents help raise the young. Cranes establish and maintain these pair bonds with elaborate courtship displays and dances. This is one of the most threatened families of birds in the world, with 11 of the 15 species vulnerable to extinction.	12
27	Haematopodidae	Oystercatchers	Oystercatchers	These large and stocky shorebirds are distinctive, with heavy red bills and loud displays.  Two species in North America live in different habitats. The Black Oystercatcher of the Pacific Coast lives on rocky shores, and the American Oystercatcher lives on sandy beaches and mud flats on the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts. Oystercatchers use their bills to catch bivalves, surprising them while they are open with a quick jab to their muscles, so the bivalves can't close their shells. Oystercatchers will also hammer on a shell until it breaks open. Some individuals specialize in one or the other technique. Oystercatchers are ground nesters, and both sexes tend the young. Unlike other shorebirds, oystercatcher parents actively feed their young for several weeks after they hatch.	5
28	Hirundinidae	Swallows	Swallows	Swallows are small, graceful birds with long, pointed wings, tiny bills, and small feet. They eat flying insects and forage over open water or ground. Many are well adapted to living near humans and use man-made structures for nesting. Swallows make their nests out of mud attached to a structure, or build in sandy burrows or in available cavities. Most swallows are social, foraging and migrating in flocks; many nest colonially, but a few are solitary.  Most are monogamous, although extra-pair copulations are common in many species. The males of some species help incubate the eggs while others do not. Both parents provide care for the young. All North American species migrate.	13
29	Hydrobatidae	Storm-petrels	Storm-Petrels	The smallest of the seabirds, the storm-petrels are usually predominantly dark brown or black, with white or light markings. Several species are mostly gray, including one species in the north Pacific. Many are migratory, and all are nocturnal at the nesting colonies. They fly very close to the water, and much of their feeding is done in flight. Incubation time and the time from hatching to fledging are highly variable because bad weather may prevent the adults from returning to the nest for several days. Eggs can hatch even if incubation is interrupted for up to 25 days, and young can survive extended periods of time between feedings, up to three weeks, by going into torpor, a sort of mini-hibernation to save energy.  The ability of the egg to survive with suspended incubation and for the chick to become torpid are important for survival, since the adults spend a lot of time away from the nest looking for food that can be hard to find.	18
30	Icteridae	Blackbirds	Blackbirds and Allies	This New World family of medium and large songbirds is very familiar, as most species are common inhabitants in human-altered settings. Many are partly to entirely black, often with iridescence or bright markings of some sort. Most blackbird species form flocks at certain times of the year, and many form multispecies flocks. Blackbirds live in open habitats and eat seeds, grain, and insects. They often forage in agricultural areas, where they can be considered pests. These birds generally forage on the ground where they are well adapted for a behavior called gaping. They insert their long, slender bills into the ground, and then open their bills to get at underground insects. Blackbirds also use this technique to get into fruits and some insects, and to reach insects that are cocooned inside wrapped leaves. Most build open-cup nests in trees, shrubs, or on the ground. Many members of this family are polygynous. Females generally build the nests and incubate the eggs, and males help feed the young.	13
31	Laniidae	Shrikes	Shrikes	Shrikes are predatory songbirds, with bills adapted for killing prey. Most members of the family are found in Eurasia and Africa, but two are resident in North America. These solitary birds perch in conspicuous spots on top of fence posts, on wires, and in trees and shrubs. From there, they pounce on large insects or small vertebrate prey. Because their feet are not strong enough to hold and tear flesh, shrikes impale their prey on a thorn or barbed wire tine or lodge it in a tree crotch to hold it while they feed. Shrikes often leave the carcasses of larger prey impaled or lodged, returning to them later for further meals. Shrikes are typically monogamous, and both parents raise the young.	13
32	Laridae	Gulls, Terns and Skimmers	Gulls and Terns	The family Laridae is made up of birds closely associated with water. Distributed throughout the world, representatives of this family nest on every continent, including Antarctica. Most are long-lived birds, many of which do not breed until they are three or four years old. Most are colony nesters and nest on the ground. Clutch size is generally small, varying from one to four eggs. Both parents incubate the eggs and help feed the young. The young typically hatch covered with down and stay in the nest for a few days, after which they leave the nest but stay nearby. Most, especially in Washington, raise a single brood a year. This group is known for its elaborate displays in the air and on the ground.

The Washington representatives of this family can be split into two groups, or subfamilies. The adaptable <i>gulls</i> are the most familiar. Sociable in all seasons, they are mainly coastal, but a number of species also nest inland. Many&#8212;but not all&#8212;are found around people. Gulls have highly variable foraging techniques and diets. <i>Terns</i> forage in flight, swooping to catch fish or insects. They dive headfirst into the water for fish. Although they are likely to be near water, they spend less time swimming than gulls.	5
33	Mimidae	Mockingbirds and Thrashers	Mockingbirds, Thrashers and Allies	The Mimids compose a relatively small New World family. Well known for their elaborate vocalizations and mimicry abilities, they often sing repeated phrases within their extended songs.  Mimids are medium-sized songbirds with strong legs, long bills, and gray or brown plumage. Many have streaked or spotted breasts.  Most forage on the ground, and use their long bills to dig in the soil.  They seldom form flocks, and are found in pairs or family groups.  They eat a combination of animal and vegetable matter, with more insects and other invertebrates in the diet in the spring and summer, and more nuts and berries in the fall and winter.  They usually nest in dense, low shrubs, and both parents help build the nest, incubate, and care for the young.	13
34	Momotidae	Motmots	Motmots	Motmots	7
35	Motacillidae	Wagtails and Pipits	Wagtails and Pipits	The wagtails and pipits are small to medium-sized open-country ground-dwellers.  Pipits are found worldwide, but wagtails are generally restricted to the Old World.  Wagtails are often brightly colored with high-contrast patterns, and pipits are typically cryptically colored and patterned.  Wagtails are sexually dimorphic: males and females have different plumage.  Pipits are generally not sexually dimorphic, that is, males and females look alike.  Wagtails and most pipits bob or wag their tails and bob their heads as they walk along the ground.  Most are long-distance migrants.  They eat primarily insects and other invertebrates, which they take from the ground, but they also eat seeds and fruit.  They are monogamous, and both parents help tend the young.	13
36	Muscicapidae	Old World Flycatchers	Old World Flycatchers	The Old World flycatchers are a large family of small passerine birds mostly restricted to the Old World (Europe, Africa and Asia). These are mainly small arboreal insectivores, many of which, as the name implies, take their prey on the wing.	13
37	Oceanitidae	Austal storm petrils	Austal storm petrils	Austral storm petrels, or southern storm petrels, are seabirds the smallest of seabirds.  They feed on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the surface, typically while hovering. Their flight is fluttering and sometimes bat-like.	18
38	Odontophoridae	New World Quail	New World Quail	Similar to their larger cousins, the grouse, members of the quail family are mostly non-migratory, ground-dwelling birds.  Most inhabit early-successional brushy areas.  Omnivores, quail eat mostly vegetative matter in winter, and switch to invertebrates in the summer.  Pairs are typically monogamous.  In the non-breeding season, small flocks called "coveys" gather together.  The young are precocial, able to walk about and feed themselves almost immediately after hatching. This enables quail to have large clutches of young.	10
39	Pandionidae	Ospreys	Ospreys	Ospreys	1
40	Paridae	Chickadees and Titmice	Chickadees	Chickadees and titmice are small, sociable, energetic birds with short, pointed bills. There are four species of chickadees in Washington, and they generally have dark caps and throat patches, with white on their cheeks.  The titmice typically have crests, and they are not represented in Washington. Males, females, and immatures have similar plumages.  Most chickadee species are non-migratory; however, some populations of Black-cappeds have been shown to have extensive migration patterns in certain years.  Most species live in forested habitats where they forage for seeds, insects, and spiders.  Many are frequent visitors to seed and suet feeders.  They have specially adapted legs that enable them to hang upside-down, which they do often when gleaning prey from twigs, bark, and foliage.  They store food to survive the winter and are able to find an impressive percentage of cached food.  Chickadees are typically monogamous and territorial during the breeding season, but form flocks (often of mixed species) with distinct dominance hierarchies the rest of the year.  They are cavity-nesters, and many excavate their own cavities, an impressive feat considering their tiny bills.  They excavate only in soft, rotten wood, and will also use old woodpecker holes, nest boxes, or other cavities.  Both members of the pair may excavate, but females generally build the nests, which are usually made of a mossy base with soft hair or other material on top.  The female incubates and broods the young, and both parents provide food.	13
41	Parulidae	Wood-Warblers	Warblers	This large group of small, brightly colored songbirds is a favorite of many birdwatchers. Wood-warblers, usually called &#8220;warblers&#8221 for short by Americans, are strictly a New World family. Most of the North American members of this group are migratory, returning in the winter to the tropics where the family originated. Warblers that nest in the understory tend to have pink legs and feet, while those that inhabit the treetops usually have black legs and feet. North American males are typically brightly colored, many with patches of yellow. Most North American warblers do not molt into a drab fall/winter plumage; the challenge posed to those trying to identify warblers in the fall results from looking at mostly juvenile birds. Their songs are generally dry, unmusical, often complex whistles (&#8220;warbles&#8221;). Warblers that live high in the treetops generally have higher-pitched songs than those that live in the understory. Warblers eat insects gleaned from foliage or captured in the air. Many supplement their insect diet with some seeds and fruit, primarily in fall and winter, and some also eat nectar. Most are monogamous. The female usually builds the nest and incubates four to five eggs for up to two weeks. Both members of the pair feed the young.	13
42	Passerellidae	Old World Sparrows	Old World Sparrows	The Old World Sparrows (family Passeridae) are stout, short-legged, seed-eating birds. They have heftier bodies and stouter bills than our native sparrows. They are usually brown, buff, or gray, with black or white markings. Most members of this family are usually found near humans and cultivated areas. This family&#8217;s greatest diversity is in northern Africa and Europe. There are only two members in North America, and both were introduced to this part of the world. The House Sparrow is the only species present in Washington.	13
43	Pelecanidae	Pelicans	Pelicans	Pelicans are known for their large, pouched bills, which they use as fishing nets. They are social birds, feeding, flying, and breeding in groups. They are among the heaviest flying birds, the largest species approaching 30 pounds, and many require a running start to get airborne. Heavy flaps interspersed with long glides characterize flight.	14
44	Phaethontidae	Tropicbirds	Tropicbirds	The tropicbirds are medium-sized seabirds with exceptionally long, narrow, central tail feathers that drag gracefully behind them in flight.  They are predominantly white in color, with black markings on their face, back, and wings.  They are typically found in tropical waters, where they fly with quick, strong wing-beats, or float on the water with their tails cocked.  Although they sometimes nest in colonies when the conditions are right, they are not generally social, and are usually found alone at sea.  Tropicbirds feed on flying fish, squid, and other aquatic creatures, mainly by plunge-diving into the water.  They are highly pelagic, coming to land largely to breed.  They first breed at two to four years, are monogamous, and form long-term pair bonds.  They nest in crevices or burrows, and both sexes help build the nest, incubate the single egg, and care for the chick for a number of months before it fledges.	15
45	Phalacrocoracidae	Cormorants	Cormorants	Cormorants are large birds with long, flexible necks, short, rounded wings, and wedge-shaped tails.  Most are predominantly shiny black, and males and females look alike.  Diving to catch fish, they swim underwater and use their feet but not their wings to propel themselves.  Their feathers get waterlogged quickly, which aids them in diving by reducing their buoyancy.  As a result, they need to dry out between dives, and many species are often seen perched with wings spread.  Distributed throughout temperate and tropical waters, cormorants most often live along marine coastlines, but a few species live on inland waters as well.  They are colony nesters, nesting on banks, cliffs, or trees, often on islands.  Both parents raise the young.	21
46	Phasianidae	Partridges, Grouse, Turkeys and Old World Quail	Partridges, Grouse and Turkeys	Pheasants, partridges, grouse, and turkeys are mostly ground-dwelling birds, although many forage or roost in trees during the winter. They do not migrate long distances, although they often use different habitats seasonally. They are omnivores, eating mostly plant matter in the winter and insects in the summer. Many of the males in this family have loud and dramatic displays. Nests are built on the ground, and clutch size is usually large. The young are precocial, able to walk and feed themselves within a few hours of hatching.	10
47	Picidae	Woodpeckers and Allies	Woodpeckers	Woodpeckers have many adaptations that allow them to perch upright against tree trunks and feed on insects under the bark or within the wood of the tree itself. Further specialization has produced many aberrant forms with different behavior and feeding habits. Most use their strong claws and stiff tail feathers to brace themselves against tree trunks as they climb. The specially adapted skulls of woodpeckers allow them to pound hard on tree trunks to excavate nesting and roosting cavities, to find food, and to communicate and attract mates. A special arrangement of bones and elastic tissues allows woodpeckers to extend their long tongues and extract insect prey from the holes they chisel with their strong, sharp beaks. The principal food of most woodpeckers is insects, especially the larvae of wood-boring beetles. A few woodpeckers feed on ants, nuts, or flying insects. Many also take a small amount of fruit. Most woodpeckers have rounded wings and an undulating flight pattern.  The plumage of most is some combination of black and white, though brown is not uncommon. Many, especially males, have small patches of red or yellow on their heads. Although they may appear to damage trees, woodpeckers are generally good for tree health because they feed so heavily on wood-boring beetles. Most woodpecker species are monogamous, and many form long-term pair bonds.  The nests are usually lined with nothing but the woodchips created by excavating the nest cavity, which is excavated by both members of the pair. Both sexes incubate the eggs, with males generally taking the night shift.  Both sexes also feed and tend the young.	16
48	Podicipedidae	Grebes	Grebes	Grebes are water-dwelling diving birds with thick, waterproof plumage.  They eat fish, aquatic insects, and other small water creatures, and they also eat their own feathers.  Grebes are known for their ornate courtship displays, which are among the most elaborate displays of any bird group.  During the breeding season they can be found on marshy ponds, where they build floating nests.  Both parents tend the cryptically patterned young, which often ride on their backs.  In the winter, grebes live on open water.  Grebes' legs are set far back on their bodies; this facilitates diving but limits their ability to walk on land.	17
49	Polioptilidae	Gnatcatchers	Gnatcatchers	The small passerine birds in the gnatcatcher family occur in North and South America (except for the far south and the high Andean regions). Most species of this mainly tropical and subtropical group are resident, but the blue-grey gnatcatcher of the United States and southern Canada migrates south in winter. They are close relatives of the wrens.	13
50	Procellariidae	Shearwaters and Petrels	Shearwaters and Petrels	This group is diverse and ranges widely in size. A common trait that all members of this family share is that their nostrils are located in a single tube at the top of their bills. Most maneuver well in high winds, and many migrate long distances.  Most, but not all, nest in burrows. Those that do nest in burrows visit them only at night. The well-developed sense of smell of the shearwaters may help them find their burrows in the dark.	18
51	Prunellidae	Accentors	Accentors	The accentors are small, sparrow-like songbirds native to the Old World.  A single species, the Siberian Accentor, reaches North America as a rare vagrant. Most members of the family are brown and gray, with some streaking or bold head markings.  Most species are secretive birds and spend much of their time on the ground.  They hop or walk with an odd shuffle.  They are insect-eaters during the summer, but eat many seeds and berries during the winter.  Females typically build the nests and incubate the eggs, and both sexes feed and care for the young.	13
52	Psittacidae	True Parrots	True Parrots	The true parrots are about 350 species of colorful flighted (with a few notable exceptions) hook-billed, mostly herbivorous birds.	19
53	Ptiliogonatidae	Silky-flycatchers	Silky-flycatchers	Native to the Americas, the silky-flycatchers are medium-sized songbirds with soft, silky plumage and long, slender tails. They often have conspicuous bristles around the base of their short, broad bills. Most are dark-colored, and most have crests. They typically inhabit tropical and subtropical environments, and only one species is regularly found north of Mexico. They are fairly social and may nest in loose colonies. Small flocks form in the non-breeding season and wander in search of food. Silky-flycatchers eat many insects, but fruit, especially berries, is their main staple. They are typically monogamous, and both sexes help raise the young.	13
54	Rallidae	Rails, Gallinules and Coots	Rails and Coots	This family is made up of wetland dwellers, most with long, unwebbed toes (coots' toes are lobed). Rails are typically elusive and cryptic, while coots are gregarious. Most family members are omnivores and use a variety of foraging techniques. The young are precocial and can walk, swim, and feed themselves shortly after hatching. Both parents help provide parental care for the young.	12
55	Recurvirostridae	Stilts and Avocets	Stilts and Avocets	Stilts and avocets make up a small, but worldwide family. These medium to large shorebirds are delicate and graceful looking, with long necks, small heads, and long, thin legs and bills. They are typically found in wetland areas, and their long legs allow them access to deeper water than many other shorebirds. Stilts have straight bills, while avocets' bills are up-curved. The stilts and avocets are unusual among the shorebirds in that they are colony nesters.  They typically lay four well-camouflaged eggs in a simple scrape on the ground. Both parents incubate and care for the chicks, although the young feed themselves.	5
56	Regulidae	Kinglets	Kinglets	This is a small family distributed around the Northern Hemisphere.  Both North American species are found in Washington.  Kinglets are tiny insectivores that actively forage for insect and spider eggs on the undersides of foliage.  They weigh less than an ounce and are among the smallest of songbirds.  They often hover in front of a branch, gleaning food from its tips and undersides.  Kinglets often flick their wings as they move about.  Both Washington species join mixed-species flocks during migration and in winter.  Kinglets are monogamous. They build deep nests that hang from conifer branches and lay large clutches of eggs. Although males usually do not incubate, both parents feed and tend the young.	13
57	Scolopacidae	Sandpipers, Phalaropes and Allies	Sandpipers, Phalaropes and Allies	This large and diverse family of shorebirds is made up mostly of northern breeders that migrate long distances. Their highly migratory nature leads them astray fairly frequently, and rarities often show up outside their normal range. Many of these mostly coastal birds forage in relation to the tides, rather than the time of day. They use a variety of foraging techniques, but the most common techniques are picking food from the ground or water, or probing into wet sand or mud. Those that probe generally have sensitive bills that open at the tips. Most members of this group eat small invertebrates. Many make dramatic, aerial display-flights during courtship. Nesting practices vary, but both parents typically help raise the young. Clutch size is usually four, and both parents generally incubate. The young are precocial and leave the nest within a day of the hatching of the last chick. Most feed themselves, although the parents generally tend the young for a varying period of time. The female typically abandons the group first, leaving the male to care for the young until they are independent.	5
58	Sittidae	Nuthatches	Nuthatches	Nuthatches are small, compact birds with short tails and long, strong bills. They have strong toes and claws, which enable them to climb up, down, and sideways on tree trunks and branches, probing for insects hidden in bark crevices. They do not use their tails to prop themselves up like woodpeckers and creepers. They sometimes stick a large seed in a crevice for support and then &#8220;hack&#8221; it open with their bills. This behavior earned them their name. Nuthatches are monogamous, and Washington&#8217;s species form long-term pair bonds. One species in Washington is a cooperative breeder, with helper-birds aiding at the nest. Nuthatches nest in cavities&#8212;some excavate their own, while others rely on natural cavities, old woodpecker holes, and to a lesser extent, nest boxes. The female generally incubates the eggs, and the male feeds her while she is on the nest. Both parents feed the young until a few weeks after they fledge.	13
59	Stercorariidae	Skuas and Jaegers	Skuas and Jaegers	The predatory jaegers and skuas are seagoing birds that nest in cold climates in the far north and south and spend the rest of the year at sea, hunting live prey and harassing other seabirds to steal food. They nest on the ground in isolated pairs or small groups. Clutch size is generally two eggs. Both parents incubate the eggs and help feed the young. The young typically hatch covered with brownish or grayish down and leave the nest after one or two days but stay nearby until fledging.	5
60	Strigidae	Typical Owls	Typical Owls	Most of the world&#8217;s owls belong to this family. The differences between the two owl families are primarily structural. The facial disks and heads of typical owls are more round than those of Barn Owls, and their legs are generally shorter.	20
61	Sturnidae	Starlings	Starlings	All members of the Starling and Myna family are native to the Old World, and populations in North America are the results of introductions.  They tend to have short, triangular or rounded wings, and short, square tails.  Members of this family are highly social and typically flock in all seasons.  Many are colonial breeders.  They have strong legs and feet and usually forage on the ground.  Most members of this family are omnivores, eating invertebrates, seeds, fruits, and eggs.  Most are monogamous and both members of a pair typically help build the nest, incubate, and tend the young.	13
62	Sulidae	Boobies and Gannets	Boobies and Gannets	Boobies and gannets are large seabirds with long, heavy, pointed wings and long tails. Most have light-colored underparts and darker upperparts. Many members of this group are white. They are strong flyers, alternating between powerful wing beats and long glides.  Most are sociable, nesting in colonies and foraging in flocks.  They eat fish, squid, and other aquatic creatures, which they catch with spectacular plunge-dives.  Their eyes are set forward on their heads, and this gives them binocular vision that aids them in foraging.  When they plunge into the water, they use their wings to swim.  They begin breeding at two to six years.  Gannets and boobies are monogamous, and often form long-term pair bonds. Males bring nest material, and females build the nests.  Both members of the pair help incubate the young by tucking one to three eggs under their webbed feet.  Incubation lasts up to eight weeks, and the parents alternate in three-day shifts.  Some species do not fledge until they are almost six months old, and are commonly dependent on both parents for up to nine months after that.  Boobies are found in tropical waters, while gannets can be found in more temperate seas.	21
63	Thraupidae	Tanagers	Tanagers	The tanagers are a large and diverse New World family with most members in the tropics. They are medium-sized birds with stout, generalized bills that allow them to eat both fruit and insects. Tanagers in the tropics have a number of differences from tanagers in the northern temperate zone. Most tropical tanagers are monomorphic, that is, males and females look alike. Most tanagers of the temperate zone exhibit a great degree of sexual dimorphism&#8212;males are brightly colored, and females are usually drab. Tropical tanagers are non-migratory and often gather in large, dramatic, mixed flocks. Northern-breeding tanagers are migratory and generally solitary but occasionally gather in small groups, especially during migration. Tanagers are generally monogamous. Females build the nest and incubate the young, and both sexes help feed the young.  Even with their bright plumage, tanagers can be difficult to see, as they inhabit the forest canopy.	13
64	Threskiomithidae	Ibises and Spoonbills	Ibises	The ibises are long-legged, long-necked wading birds that look superficially like herons.  Their feeding styles, however, are very different.  They are mostly tactile feeders, and use their long, often decurved bills to probe in shallow water or mud for invertebrates or small vertebrates.  They generally inhabit wetlands, but some forage in upland fields or along densely forested rivers.  They are sociable in all seasons, feeding in flocks, and nesting in colonies.  They fly with their necks fully extended, and flocks often congregate in lines or V-formations and may flap and glide in unison.  They begin breeding at two to four years and are monogamous, but pair bonds last a single season.  Both members of the pair help build bulky platform nests, incubate two to four eggs, and feed the young, which stick their heads into the adults' mouths and feed on partly digested food.  Some species in this group are migratory, and others are resident.	14
65	Trochilidae	Hummingbirds	Hummingbirds	Hummingbirds are tiny, nectar- and insect-eating birds. Their unique manner of flight allows them to fly forwards, backwards, or hover in one spot.  Hummingbirds are found only in the Western Hemisphere, and most are found in tropical areas.  Of the species that live in Washington, all but one migrate south in the winter. Male hummingbirds often have an iridescent throat patch called a "gorget." The females build the nests, incubate, and feed the young without assistance from males.  Hummingbirds are among the smallest of warm-blooded animals and often consume more than half their total weight in food and twice their weight in water in a single day.	22
66	Troglodytidae	Wrens	Wrens	The wrens of northern North America are small, brown birds, which make up for their drab colors with their complex songs.  Active foragers, they generally search for food low in the understory or on the ground, where they use their narrow bills to probe in crevices for insects and spiders.  They are usually solitary or in pairs and do not form flocks.  Most species lay eggs in enclosed areas, either in cavities or covered nests.  Usually the male begins a number of nests, which typically have coarse foundations upon which the actual nest cups may later be built.  The female then selects one nest and completes it.  Incubation is usually by the female alone, although both parents feed the young.  One odd practice of wrens is their tendency to puncture the eggs of other birds, both of their own and other species.  One theory to explain this, as well as the multiple nests, is that wrens strive to increase the number of empty nests in their territory. This may protect them from predators that might abandon an area after finding most of the nests empty.  Many wrens hold their tails cocked up over their backs.  Since many other birds also do this, the posture is by no means diagnostic of wrens.	13
67	Turdidae	Thrushes	Thrushes	The thrushes are a large family of songbirds found worldwide. The eight species found regularly in Washington have a diet that varies seasonally between insects and other invertebrates in the summer, and berries in the winter. Most are short-distance migrants, but some migrate to the tropics. Many of the thrushes forage primarily on the ground. The thrushes are known for their beautiful, flute-like songs, and are considered some of the best songsters in Washington.	13
68	Tyrannidae	Tyrant Flycatchers	Tyrant Flycatchers	Unlike most passerines found in North America, flycatchers are suboscines. Suboscines have a simpler syrinx (voice box) than the oscines (songbirds), and hence have less-developed and less-elaborate songs. Their song is innate, and does not contain a learned component. The flycatchers are the only suboscine passerines found in North America north of Mexico. Nearly all suboscines (and all Tyrannidae) are native to the New World, and they are much more numerous in the tropics, where several other families occur in addition to the Tyrannidae. Flycatchers are named for their foraging style. They sit quietly on a perch and dart out to grab a flying insect from the air, and then return to their perch to wait for the next meal to fly by. Many also forage by hovering next to foliage or over the ground. Most have a distinct, upright posture and a slight crest. They have small feet as they do not typically walk or run on the ground. Most flycatchers are monogamous. The female generally builds the nest, incubates the eggs, and broods the young, although both parents feed the young. Flycatchers of the genus <I>Empidonax</I> pose many identification challenges for birders. Range, habitat, vocalizations, and behavior must all be taken into account to distinguish between members of this group.	13
69	Tytonidae	Barn Owls	Barn Owls	The family Tytonidae is a widely distributed family of owls, inhabiting woodlands, farmlands, and savannas on every continent except Antarctica. There is one North American representative&#8212;the Barn Owl. This species is very similar to the typical owls (Strigidae) in habits and functions. Most of the differences between the two groups are structural. The facial disks of Barn Owls are more heart-shaped, rather than round, and their heads are longer and narrower overall.  They have longer legs than typical owls.	20
70	Vireonidae	Vireos	Vireos	This family is found only in the New World.  Vireos are small birds that move about slowly and deliberately as they glean insects from foliage and twigs. Their bills are cylindrical, with a slight hook at the end.  These bills are relatively large for birds their size, which enables them to eat fairly large insects. Most vireos are drab colored, with olive-green or yellow upperparts and lighter olive or buffy underparts. Many have eye-rings, eye-lines, or wing-bars. In Washington, vireos with wing-bars have eye-rings, and those without wing-bars have eye-lines. Vireos are often hard to see as they forage in high or thick foliage, and when found are generally alone or in pairs rather than in large flocks. Most have fairly simple songs that they sing repeatedly, many singing through the entire day and even while on the nest. Nests are generally suspended from small horizontally forked branches. Pairs are monogamous, and both parents raise the young.	13