1	1	Accipiter	cooperii	Cooper's Hawk	Fairly common winter. Uncommon breeder.	LC	Cooper's Hawk populations, especially in the East, declined significantly in the middle of the 20th Century, due to shooting, trapping, and pesticide contamination. They are still listed as endangered or threatened in several eastern states, but most populations have recovered well. Intentional killing is no longer an issue in most areas, although it does still occur. Pesticide contamination has less of an impact since the banning of DDT. The Washington Gap Analysis listed Cooper's Hawks on their at-risk list, although populations in the West appear to be relatively stable. Because Cooper's Hawks are inconspicuous, especially when they are nesting, it is difficult to get a clear picture of their status.	The Cooper's Hawk is the most widespread of the three North American accipiters. Females are up to one third larger than males, one of the largest sexual dimorphism size differences of any hawk. Adults have solid gray upperparts, barred with reddish-brown. Their long tails are barred gray and black, rounded at the ends, with a white band at the tips. Their eyes are red. Immature birds are brown above with brown streaking on their white underparts; they have yellow eyes. Cooper's Hawks have short, rounded wings that are set slightly farther back on their bodies than those of the smaller, but similar-looking, Sharp-shinned Hawk. Their heads are relatively larger and their gray caps are darker and a little more prominent than those of the Sharp-shinned. The white tip of the tail of the Cooper's Hawk is usually wider than that of the Sharp-shinned Hawk, especially in the fall. All of these differences are quite subtle, and with the size difference between males and females, it can be difficult to distinguish a male Cooper's Hawk from a female Sharp-shinned Hawk.		1	Cooper's Hawks are generally found in forested areas up to 3,000 feet, especially near edges and rivers. Unlike the Sharp-shinned Hawk, which prefers conifers, the Cooper's Hawk prefers hardwood stands when they are available, but will use conifers too. The species prefers mature forests, but can be found in urban and suburban areas where there are tall trees for nesting. During the nesting season, Cooper's Hawks are often more common in open areas than Sharp-shinned Hawks. In winter, Sharp-shinned Hawks are seen in more open areas.	Cooper's Hawks are reclusive and can be difficult to spot, especially during the breeding season, but they can be found in appropriate habitat in both eastern and western Washington year round.	The hunting Cooper's Hawk approaches its prey stealthily, moving quietly through dense cover until it is close enough to overcome its target with a burst of speed. The secretive traits that allow the Cooper's Hawk to surprise its prey also make it difficult to observe. It is most easily seen during migration.	Medium-sized birds (robins and jays) and small mammals (squirrels and mice) make up the majority of the Cooper's Hawk's diet.	Uncommon but increasing in forested habitats at low and middle elevations throughout four-county area; probably under-recorded due to secretive, non-aggressive nature at nest sites. Less common at high elevations, particularly in King Countyâ??possibly resulting from paucity of large hardwood trees for nesting (Smith et al. 1997). Increased frequency of nesting in wooded tracts within westside urban core beyond close of atlas period perhaps indicative of ability to adapt to human-altered habitats.	Courtship is lengthy for Cooper's Hawks, and the male may feed the female for up to a month before she begins to lay eggs. They nest in a tree, 25-50 feet off the ground. The nest is often built on top of an old nest or clump of mistletoe. Both sexes help build the stick nest lined with pieces of bark. The female incubates the 3 to 5 eggs for 30 to 33 days. The male brings food and incubates the eggs when the female leaves the nest to eat. Once the 3 to 5 eggs hatch, the female broods for about two weeks. During this time, the male continues to bring food for the female and the young. He gives the food to the female, and she feeds it to the nestlings. The young start to climb about the nest at four weeks of age, and begin to make short flights soon after. The parents continue to feed the young for up to seven weeks.	Most of Washington's Cooper's Hawks probably migrate south for the winter, but are replaced by other birds from farther north.  Fall migration is often along mountain ridges and coastlines. Most of the migrants that pass through Washington probably head to central and southern Mexico for the winter.	coopers_hawk	COHA			
2	1	Accipiter	gentilis	Northern Goshawk	Rare resident.	LC	While Northern Goshawks have been expanding their range in some areas of the Northeast in recent decades, many populations are still considered threatened or endangered. Logging is the largest threat to Northern Goshawks in Washington.  The Northern Goshawk is listed as a species of concern by the US Fish and Wildlife Service and is a candidate for listing by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.	The largest of the three North American accipiters and a resident of the Old World, the adult Goshawk is solid gray above, with finely barred, lighter gray below. It has a distinctive white bar over its red eyes. The juvenile is mottled-brown above with brown and buff streaking below. The juvenile has light lines over its eyes, which are yellow. The goshawk's tail is long, but wider than those of the other accipiters; this is the best way to distinguish a Goshawk from a Cooper's Hawk. The juvenile's tail is more darkly banded than that of the adult. The Goshawk is similar in shape to the Sharp-shinned and Cooper's Hawk, with short round wings, and a long narrow tail.		1	Northern Goshawks inhabit mature coniferous forests, often on moderate slopes, especially at mid- to high elevations. They are often found along the forest edge, and will use mixed coniferous and deciduous forests as well.	The Northern Goshawk is uncommon year round. It is most common along the eastern slope of the Cascades. It is less common in the Olympic Mountains, but can be seen occasionally in the higher points of this range.	This aggressive predator is built to move quickly and quietly. It approaches its prey stealthily, moving unnoticed through dense cover, until it is close enough to overcome its prey in mid-air with a burst of speed, or drop out of a tree and swoop down on ground-dwelling prey. Northern Goshawks also hunt in open areas. The goshawk takes its prize to a perch and plucks the feathers or hair.	Northern Goshawks are opportunistic, eating a wide variety of prey. Squirrels, snowshoe hares, grouse, corvids, woodpeckers, and other medium to large songbirds are all potential prey of the goshawk.	Records generalized to full township/ranges; true population density thus much thinner than symbolized. Uncommon in mature coniferous forests in Cascades. Most common in Kittitas County forest zones, with a few mid- to high-elevation records from King County. Confirmed nest in extreme southwestern Kitsap County in 1991 represents only record from four-county area west of Puget Sound. Species has declined precipitously in historic times due to unfavorable logging practices and intolerance of human presence near nest sites. Absent as breeder from developed lowlands, where extremely rare even as migrant.	The birds are monogamous, and the pair bonds often long-term. The nest, a platform made from thin sticks, lined with bark and greenery, is typically placed at a major crotch in a tree, 25-50 feet off the ground. The female does most of the nest construction, and the nest may be reused from year to year, growing quite large. The male feeds the female before she begins to lay eggs.  The female incubates the 2-4 eggs for around 32 days. The male continues to bring food, and may take over incubation for short stints while the female eats. Once the young hatch, the female broods constantly for 9-14 days. The male provides food, and the female generally feeds the young. Nestlings venture out of the nest to nearby branches at 34-35 days, and take their first flights shortly after that. The parents continue to feed the young until they are about 70 days old.  Both birds aggressively defend the nest, attacking any interloper, including humans.	Northern Goshawks are, for the most part, non-migratory. Some birds move to lower elevations in the winter, and irruptive movements into more southern areas occur occasionally, generally in response to the collapse of prey populations.	northern_goshawk				
3	1	Accipiter	striatus	Sharp-shinned Hawk	Fairly common winter. Uncommon breeder.	LC	Sharp-shinned Hawk numbers dropped in the mid-20th Century as a result of eggshell thinning due to DDT. They were also easy, convenient targets at hawk migration points. The banning of DDT and changing attitudes towards predators have enabled the Sharp-shinned Hawk to recover well, although new declines have been discovered in some areas in the past few decades. These declines may be due to a variety of factors, including environmental contaminants, reduced prey supply, and habitat changes. In Washington, Sharp-shinned Hawks are poorly sampled, as they are hard to find during the breeding season. Christmas Bird Count data reflect a slight increase in Washington, but sample sizes are small, and this may or many not reflect a true increase.	The Sharp-shinned Hawk is the smallest of the three North American accipiters. The female is larger than the male. Adults have solid gray upperparts and barred, reddish-brown underparts. Their long, square tails have gray and black bars with very narrow, white tips. Their eyes are red. Immature birds are brown above with diffuse brown streaking below; they have yellow eyes. Sharp-shinned Hawks have short, rounded wings that are set slightly more forward on their bodies than those of the larger, but similar-looking, Cooper's Hawk. Their heads are also relatively smaller and their gray caps less distinct than the Cooper's. The white tip of the tail of the Cooper's Hawk is usually wider than that of Sharp-shinned Hawk, especially in the fall. All of these differences are subtle, making it quite difficult to distinguish a male Cooper's Hawk from a female Sharp-shinned Hawk.		1	Sharp-shinned Hawks inhabit coniferous or mixed woodlands, avoiding open country. While Cooper's Hawks appear to prefer deciduous forests, Sharp-shinned Hawks appear to prefer coniferous forests. During winter, they are often found in woodlots, towns, and parks.	Sharp-shinned Hawks are most easily seen during migration along mountain ridges, rivers, and coastlines.  Rarely seen during the breeding season, Sharp-shinned Hawks are uncommon breeders throughout Washington's coniferous forests, with the exception of the temperate rainforests on the Olympic Peninsula. They winter throughout Washington in a variety of habitats, including semi-open woodlands and urban areas, and are often seen near bird feeders.	Built to move quickly and quietly within dense forest, the hunting Sharp-shinned Hawk approaches its prey stealthily, until it is close enough to overcome its target with a burst of speed. This agility allows the bird to hunt successfully around bird feeders. The secretive traits and inconspicuous nature that allow the Sharp-shinned Hawk to surprise its prey also make it difficult to observe. Sharp-shinned Hawks often have a plucking post near their nests, where they go to pluck feathers from prey, leaving an accumulation of feathers and whitewash at the base of a stump, fence post, or fallen tree.	Small birds (sparrow-sized up to robins and occasionally quail) are the most common prey, although small rodents, reptiles, and large insects are part of the diet as well. The Sharp-shinned Hawk's nesting cycle coincides with peak songbird abundance.	Breeds mostly in conifer forests, with few records from open farmlands or urbanized areas. Found sparsely throughout in appropriate habitat on both sides of Cascades, but nesting pairs easily overlooked due to their secretive nature. True breeding distribution perhaps obscured by records of migrants, which may occur as late as end of May and as early as beginning of August. Identification confusion with Cooper's Hawk may also be a factor is some cases.	The Sharp-shinned Hawk's nest is usually well concealed in a dense conifer tree, 20 to 60 feet off the ground. The nest is made of large twigs lined with bark, and is often built on top of an old squirrel or crow nest. Male and female help collect material for the nest, although the female does most of the building. She incubates 3 to 5 eggs for 30 to 32 days, while the male brings food to her. The female broods the young for the first 16 to 23 days, and the male continues to provide food, which the female feeds to the young. At 3 to 4 weeks, the young start venturing out of the nest to nearby branches, and begin to fly a few weeks later. Once the young can make sustained flights, the parents pass prey to them in mid-air. The young remain with the parents for another few weeks until they become independent.	Sharp-shinned Hawks are migratory, sometimes traveling long distances between breeding and wintering grounds. Most northern-US breeders winter in the southern United States, but some migrate as far as Mexico and Central America. Some birds in the Northwest are permanent residents, although they do appear to withdraw from higher elevations in the winter.	sharp-shinned_hawk	SSHA			
4	57	Actitis	macularius	Spotted Sandpiper	Fairly common summer resident. Rare winter west.	LC	Spotted Sandpipers are the most widespread breeding sandpiper in North America.  They are thought to have declined in many parts of their range in recent decades, possibly due to habitat loss and pesticides, which are both potential threats. However, they are still common range-wide. In Washington, Breeding Bird Survey data indicate that the population has increased significantly since 1966. The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the North American population at 150,000 birds.	Spotted Sandpipers are distinctive shorebirds with bold, dark spots on their undersides during the breeding season. The beak is relatively short, straight, and yellowish in breeding plumage.  In non-breeding plumage, Spotted Sandpipers lose most of their spots.		1	Spotted Sandpipers breed in a variety of freshwater habitats from sea level to alpine areas, although they are not as common at higher elevations. Nesting near streams, rivers, and lakes in open and wooded country, they require a shore for foraging and herbaceous cover for their nests. During migration and winter, they can be found almost anywhere near water, including mudflats, beaches, breakwaters, sewage ponds, and even in irrigation ditches.  They prefer fresh water, but can also be found along salt water during migration.	Common breeders from May through September all over the state, Spotted Sandpipers are less common at higher elevations.  Most are gone by November, although a small number winter in both fresh and salt water in Washington, mainly near the coast and in Puget Sound, in most years. Examine the edges of freshwater streams, sewage ponds, and agricultural ponds to find them.	Spotted Sandpipers are fairly solitary, and are seldom seen in flocks. They are well known for their habit of bobbing their rears up and down, and this can be a good way to identify them.  Their flight is also characteristic'they fly low over the water with shallow, stiff wing-beats and bursts of flapping and gliding.  When foraging, they pick up items from the surface of the ground or water, but will also grab insects out of the air.  They forage right at the edge of a body of water.	Spotted Sandpipers eat a wide variety of invertebrates.	In King and Kittitas Counties, common and widespread at low to moderate elevations in most freshwater habitats, including ponds, lakes, and rivers; uncommon at higher-elevation sites. Less frequently noted in Kitsap County and scarce in Island County.	Spotted Sandpipers are polyandrous'the female breeds with more than one male.  Females are fully dominant; they are larger than males and arrive first on the breeding territory. The female stakes out a territory and displays to attract a male.  The nest is on the ground, partly concealed by a log or a rock or hidden in vegetation, and lined with grass, twigs, and feathers. The female lays 4 eggs, and then leaves the male to incubate them while she finds another mate.  In this way, she may breed with up to four males, each of which will raise a clutch. The female will often raise a final clutch herself.  Incubation lasts for 19 to 22 days. The young leave the nest soon after they hatch.  The male tends the young for at least four weeks, although they find their own food. Some populations are monogamous, and in those instances, the female will help tend the young. The young can fly weakly at 15 days, and by 18 days are capable of sustained flight.	Some Spotted Sandpipers migrate short distances to the southern United States and Pacific Coast, but others travel as far as South America.  They generally arrive in Washington the first or second week of May.  Most adults leave by late July or August, and juveniles follow by September or October.	spotted_sandpiper	SPSA			
5	48	Aechmophorus	clarkii	Clark's Grebe	Uncommon breeder east. Rare winter west.	LC	Tens of thousands of Western and Clark's Grebes were killed at the turn of the 20th Century for their feathers.  With protection, they have recovered and can now be found breeding in new areas not occupied historically.  However, fluctuating water levels, oil spills, gill nets, and poisons such as rotenone (used to kill carp) may have negative effects on the population.  When approached by humans, Clark's Grebes will leave their nest, leaving eggs vulnerable to predation and the elements.  For this reason, areas frequently disturbed by humans may have low productivity.  Even though they are extremely similar and closely related, Western and Clark's Grebes are separate species.  Although they breed side by side in the same area, hybrids are surprisingly rare.  Clark's Grebes are far less common in Washington than Westerns.	Clark's Grebes are large and slender with long necks and long, thin bills.  Their plumage is dark gray above and white below, with a clear color division.  The top of the face is black and the bottom white.  In Clark's Grebe, the black does not extend below the eye.  In the closely related and similar-appearing Western Grebe, the black ends below the eye.  The bill of Clark's Grebe is bright yellow to orange-yellow.		1	In winter Clark's Grebes are found mostly on saltwater bays. During the breeding season they prefer freshwater wetlands with a mix of open water and emergent vegetation.  Breeding areas are located in the central arid steppe and Big Sage/Fescue zones that stretch from California north and east to south-central Canada.  Clark's Grebes tend to forage farther from shore and in deeper water than Western Grebes.  They are commonly found in mixed flocks with Western Grebes, but even in these flocks they tend to associate preferentially with other Clark's Grebes.	Clark's Grebes are found on both small and large bodies of water in and around Grant County, including Potholes Reservoir, Moses Lake, Banks Lake, and on ponds within the Columbia and Saddle Mountain National Wildlife Refuges. Very rarely, Clark's Grebes are also found on lakes in western Washington in winter.	Clark's Grebes are highly gregarious in all seasons, wintering in large flocks and nesting in colonies.  The neck structure of the Clark's Grebe allows it to thrust its beak forward, like a spear, which it does to catch prey.  As a family, grebes are known for their elaborate courtship displays.  Clark's Grebes and the closely related Western Grebes perform the most spectacular displays of the family, and arguably the most complex known for any birds.  The rituals of Western and Clark's Grebes are almost identical; the only difference is that one of many calls differs in the number of notes.	In all seasons and habitats, the primary food of the Clark's Grebe is fish.		Both the male and female build a floating nest made from a heap of plant material anchored to emergent vegetation in a shallow area of a marsh.  The female lays three to four eggs, and both parents incubate.  Once hatched, the young leave the nest almost immediately and ride on the backs of the parents.  Both parents feed the young.  Young are plain gray and white, not striped like the young of other grebes.	Birds from the northern part of the population migrate at night to the Pacific Ocean. Others, mainly in the central California valleys, are year-round residents.	clarks_grebe				
6	48	Aechmophorus	occidentalis	Western Grebe	Common winter west. Fairly common summer east.	LC	At the turn of the 20th Century, tens of thousands of Western and Clark's Grebes were killed for their feathers.  With protection, they have recovered and can now be found breeding in new areas not occupied historically.  Fluctuating water levels, oil spills, gill nets, and poisons such as rotenone (used to kill carp) are factors that negatively affect the population.  When approached by humans, the parents will leave the nest, leaving eggs vulnerable to predation and the elements. Thus, areas frequently disturbed by humans may have low productivity.	Western Grebes are large and slender with long necks and long, thin bills.  Plumage is dark gray above and white below, with a clear color division.  The top of the face is black, and the bottom white.  The black extends below the eye in the Western Grebe. (In the closely related and similar-appearing Clark's Grebe, the black ends above the eye.)  The bill of the Western Grebe is yellowish to dull olive.		1	In winter Western Grebes are found mostly on saltwater bays.  During the breeding season they are found on freshwater wetlands with a mix of open water and emergent vegetation.  The breeding areas are located in the central arid steppe and Big Sage/Fescue zones stretching from California north and east to south-central Canada.	Western Grebes can be found during the breeding season on large ponds and reservoirs in the Big Sage/Fescue zones in eastern Washington, especially at Moses Lake and Potholes Reservoir in Grant County.  Nesting colonies have also been found near Crab Creek, Frenchman Hills Wasteway, Lake Lenore, and many ponds in the Columbia National Wildlife Refuge, all in Grant County.  In Douglas County they can be found at Banks Lake.  Non-breeders can be found in the summer in coastal regions of the state as well, such as in Bellingham Bay.  In winter Western Grebes are rare in eastern Washington but common on the coast and in Puget Sound.  Wintering flocks with birds numbering in the thousands were historically present in Bellingham Bay. Now large numbers of Western Grebes winter at Quartermaster Harbor (Vashon-Maury Island) and Saratoga Passage. There are also a few hundred on Lake Washington and on Elliott Bay.	Western Grebes are highly gregarious in all seasons, wintering in large flocks and nesting in colonies.  The neck structure of Western Grebes allows them to thrust their beaks forward, like spears, a motion they use to catch prey.  As a family, grebes are known for their elaborate courtship displays.  Western Grebes and the closely related Clark's Grebes perform the most spectacular displays of the family.  The displays of Western and Clark's Grebes are almost identical; the only apparent difference is that one of many calls differs in the number of notes.	In all seasons and habitats, the primary food of Western Grebes is fish.		Together, the male and female Western Grebe build a floating nest made of heaps of plant material anchored to emergent vegetation in a shallow area of a marsh.  The female lays three to four eggs, and both parents incubate.  Once hatched, the young leave the nest almost immediately and ride on the backs of the parents.  Both parents feed the young.  Young are plain gray and white, not striped like the young of other grebes.	Many birds from the northern part of the population migrate at night to the Pacific Ocean.	western_grebe	WEGR			
7	60	Aegolius	acadicus	Northern Saw-whet Owl	Fairly common resident.	LC	How numerous Northern Saw-whet Owls are is not known, although they are probably more abundant than most data indicate, as detection rates are low.  Across their range they are still widespread and fairly common, though the population may have decreased because of habitat loss and snag removal.	Named for the resemblance of one of their calls to the sound of saw teeth being sharpened, Northern Saw-whet Owls are small, chestnut-brown owls with prominent white markings on the folded wings and brown-and-white striped chests and bellies.  They have no ear-tufts.  Their eyes are yellow, and their white eyebrows connect in a 'Y' over their beaks.  Throats are white.  Fledglings are solid brown above with light buffy bellies and a well-defined white triangle on their foreheads.		1	Northern Saw-whet Owls inhabit all forest types--coniferous, broadleaved, and mixed.  They often roost in dense evergreens near forest openings, especially in winter.  They commonly use streamside woodlands and can even be found in riparian areas of shrub-steppe habitat, although their densities are highest in mid-elevation conifer forests.	Northern Saw-whet Owls are uncommon to fairly common year-round residents in forested zones up to the sub-alpine zone throughout Washington.  In the autumn, they invade the lowlands east of the Cascades and are most often seen during this time.  On rare occasions they have been found in the Seattle area.  The Reifel Refuge, just north of the Washington-British Columbia border, has been a reliable place to find them.	Northern Saw-whet Owls hunt almost entirely at night.  They are sit-and-wait predators, watching for prey from low perches (generally 6-12 feet off the ground) and swooping down silently on their prey.  They return to the same daytime roosts for extended periods and when found in daytime, can often be found again on the same perch on subsequent days.	Northern Saw-whet Owls eat mostly small rodents, especially deer mice.  They also eat voles, shrews, young squirrels, other small mammals, small birds, and large insects.	Uncommon to fairly common in forest zones at low and moderate elevations throughout. True distribution obscured by limited, unsystematic nature of nocturnal BBA surveys in most of four-county area. Concentration of records in forested lowlands and foothills of King County and on Bainbridge Island directly reflects greater observer effort there. Anomalous 13 April 1997 record near Hanson Creek along Columbia River may represent migrant, but could reflect this nomadic owl's propensity to remain and rarely nest in shrub-steppe riparian situations. Apparently rare in highest-elevation forest. Uses tree cavities or nest boxes for nesting.	Generally monogamous, Northern Saw-whet Owls can be polygamous when prey is abundant.  Males choose and defend territories to which they attract females by calling.  Females choose the nest cavity, often an old Northern Flicker or Pileated Woodpecker nest hole, usually selecting a different site each year.  Northern Saw-whet Owls also use artificial nest boxes.  The female incubates 5 to 6 eggs.  The male brings her food while she is on the nest and continues to bring food after the young hatch.  The female broods for about 18 days.  Once brooding is finished, she may help the male provide the young with food or she may depart, sometimes finding a new mate and raising a second brood.  The young leave the nest at 4 to 5 weeks, and are fed for another 6 to 8 weeks.  Northern Saw-whet Owls are unusual among North American owls in that the young can fly reasonably well as soon as they leave the nest.	Some Northern Saw-whet Owls are residents, while others migrate, either latitudinally or altitudinally.  Recent studies suggest that more migrate than had been previously thought.  In Washington, birds from Canada and mountainous areas winter in Washington's lowlands.	northern_saw-whet_owl	NSWO			
8	60	Aegolius	funereus	Boreal Owl	Rare resident.	LC	An inaccessible breeding range, secretive habits, population fluctuations resulting from the cyclic abundance of prey, and nomadic movements make it difficult to determine long-term population trends.  Populations in northern North America are probably at little risk because of the remoteness of Boreal Owl habitat.  The first confirmed nest south of Canada was found in 1978, and the population in the mountains of the western United States is now thought to be larger than was originally believed.  This population, however, may be at risk.  Timber harvest often reduces prey populations, destroys the forest structure needed for effective foraging, and eliminates nest cavities.  While Boreal Owls readily use nest boxes, most effects of timber harvest are difficult to remedy.	Boreal Owls, known in Eurasia as Tengmalm's Owls, are small owls of the north.  They have yellow eyes and facial disks that are mostly white, edged with broken black rings.  Their heads, which do not have ear-tufts, are dark and tightly dotted with light spots.  Their backs are covered with spots larger and farther apart than those on the head.  Breasts are brown, with white spotting and streaking.  Fledglings are uniformly brown, with white eyebrows and throats.		1	Boreal Owls inhabit mature boreal and sub-alpine conifer and mixed forests in the far north and at high elevations.  For the most part they are found in the same habitat year-round, although in early spring they may frequent clear cuts and agricultural fields.  During nomadic winter movements they are most often found in conifer groves but may be found in unusual habitats, even cities.	Boreal Owls are uncommon to rare year-round residents of mountainous areas in northeast Washington, the Blue Mountains, and the Cascades.  They are rarely found below 4,000 feet.  Access to their breeding range is limited by snow for much of the year, making sightings rare.	These strictly nocturnal birds (except in areas where there is no summer darkness) can be very difficult to find, and are considered a much prized sighting by Washington birdwatchers.  When hunting, they move silently from perch to perch, watching for prey.  When they locate prey, they swoop down and take it with their talons.  Keen hearing allows them to locate prey under a covering of snow.  Courtship takes place in late winter and early spring, which is the time when one is most likely to hear their low whistled vocalizations.	Boreal Owls prey on small mammals, including voles, mice, and small squirrels.  They also take small birds and large insects, especially crickets.		Boreal Owls form monogamous pairs.  Males defend territories and attract females by calling, then show the females potential nest sites.  Boreal Owls are cavity-nesters, and the female chooses the cavity for the nest, often an old Northern Flicker or Pileated Woodpecker hole, a natural cavity, or a man-made nest box.  Boreal Owls do not add nesting material to the site.  They will not use a nest box that has been used by a Boreal Owl the previous year unless it has been cleaned out.  The female typically incubates 3-4 eggs for 26-32 days.  After the young hatch, she broods the owlets for about three weeks.  The male brings food to the nest, and the female feeds it to the young.  Once brooding is finished, both adults hunt.  The young leave the nest after 28-36 days but are still tended by their parents.  They become independent and disperse about 3-6 weeks after their first flight.	While Boreal Owls do not undertake a regular migration, winter invasions south of the breeding range are not uncommon.  These invasions, which are most likely in response to the reduced availability of prey, may bring Boreal Owls to unusual lower-elevation locations.	boreal_owl				
9	7	Aeronautes	saxatalis	White-throated Swift	Fairly common summer resident east	LC	White-throated Swifts are common and widespread, and their numbers appear stable. Breeding Bird Survey data have shown a significant decline since 1966, but the BBS may not accurately reflect the state of a remote-nesting species such as this. White-throated Swifts are expanding their range in some states. Much of this range-expansion is due to their increasing use of man-made structures such as highway overpasses and bridges for nesting, although it is not known whether breeding is as successful in these areas as in their native habitat. The remoteness and difficulty of access to natural nesting areas has protected them from disturbance, but the growth of recreational rock-climbing has increased human impact and habitat degradation.	The White-throated Swift is a large, slender swift with long wings and a narrow tail, usually held closed into a point. It is mostly black, with white at the trailing edge of the secondaries, on the sides of the rump, and on the throat, narrowing towards the belly.		1	 A western species, the White-throated Swift inhabits rocky cliffs and canyons. It is typically found nesting in arid regions, but near major rivers. It is found on sea cliffs. Foraging habitat is more generalized than nesting habitat, as these swifts often roam far from breeding areas to feed. In eastern Washington, they can be found foraging in shrub-steppe habitats, grasslands, wetlands, and in the Ponderosa pine zone, usually near cliffs.	White-throated Swifts are common at lower elevations in eastern Washington, including Ponderosa pine and steppe zones. They are typically found breeding along major rivers and coulees, including the Columbia, Yakima, and Spokane Rivers, and Grand and Moses Coulees. They are also found in the southeastern Blue Mountains. The central Columbia Basin, with its many coulees and cliffs, is the area of highest density in Washington. White-throated Swifts arrive in these areas in late March and leave by mid-August.	White-throated Swifts forage exclusively in flight, often in small groups. Foraging height varies with the weather.  White-throated Swifts are colonial, and large numbers are often seen near nesting colonies. White-throated Swift colonies persist in the same location for many years.	White-throated Swifts eat flying insects.	Common breeder in eastern Kittitas County on basalt cliffs of Columbia River and side canyons as well as in Yakima Canyon and tributaries from about Umtanum Creek south. Forages over open habitats including wetlands and steppe, sometimes at considerable distance from nesting sites. Isolated records from south flank of Table Mountain and along South Fork Manastash Creek may represent such wanderers.	Nests are located in narrow, vertical crevices in cliffs. They are inaccessible to humans, and thus much of the nesting behavior of this species is not known. The nest is a shallow half-disk made of vegetation and feathers, stuck together and to the wall with sticky saliva. White-throated Swifts lay 3-6 eggs, which are incubated, probably only by the female, for about 24 days. Both parents feed the young, who probably crawl about inside the crevice before they first fly.	White-throated Swifts are migratory, and Washington birds leave the state for the winter.  They travel shorter distances than other swifts and are the only swift likely to be seen in North America in the winter.  They may go into torpor in cool weather, which may allow them to winter farther north than other swifts.	white-throated_swift				
10	5	Aethia	psittacula	Parakeet Auklet		LC		About a dozen records, February-April. Probably regular in winter in small numbers well offshore.		1								parakeet_auklet				
11	5	Aethia	pygmaea	Whiskered Auklet		LC		One record, from Penn Cove (Whidbey Island, Island County) in May 1999.		1								whiskered_auklet				
12	30	Agelaius	phoeniceus	Red-winged Blackbird	Common resident.	LC	Red-winged Blackbirds are highly adaptable and quickly colonize newly created and small wetlands. They do well in human-altered settings, and are considered a pest species in many areas where huge flocks damage crops. Large roosts may be considered nuisances because of the noise and mess, and because they may harbor histoplasmosis, a fungal lung infection that is contagious to humans. Many Red-winged Blackbirds have been killed to limit crop predation and nuisance impacts, but some evidence shows that estimates of their impacts on crops have been overestimated.	Red-winged Blackbirds display marked sexual dimorphism. Males in breeding plumage are very familiar birds to many people. They are solid black, with red wing-patches. Each patch has a light yellow stripe below, and can be displayed in varying amounts. Tricolored Blackbirds, which are rare in Washington, look similar, but have more pointed wing-tips, thinner bills, and white edging on the red patches. Female Red-winged Blackbirds are smaller, dark, and streaked. They have a white line over each eye and are evenly streaked all down the back. First-year males look like mature males but with rusty edgings on their black feathers. They have red wing-patches, but they are generally paler than mature males and may be darkly spotted.		1	Cattail marsh is the quintessential Red-winged Blackbird habitat, although these birds will breed in wooded or brushy swamps, wet meadows, hay fields, salt marshes, irrigation canals, and roadside ditches. They prefer wetlands with emergent vegetation, but may nest in shrubby upland areas occasionally. They do not require large territories and are often seen in very small patches of habitat. In winter they often congregate in agricultural areas.	Red-winged Blackbirds are widespread and abundant breeders throughout Washington's lowlands. In winter they are often less widespread, but can be abundant in the Puget Trough, along the Columbia and Snake Rivers, at the Potholes, and at dairy farms along the outer coast.  Many birds in Washington are migratory, and others move to lowlands forming large winter flocks.	Red-winged Blackbirds are among the most well studied birds, especially in regard to behavior. They form flocks outside of the breeding season and nest close together. Although they pack tightly into small areas, they are very territorial during the breeding season. Males often sit up high on tall cattails surveying their territories and will aggressively fly after intruders with their red wing-patches displayed boldly. They forage on the ground, but will also forage in shrubs and trees.	About 75% of the annual Red-winged Blackbird diet is seeds. During the breeding season, they also eat insects, especially dragonflies, mayflies, and caddis flies as they emerge from their aquatic larval stage. In winter, grain is an important source of food, and many birds feed on corn stubble and at feedlots.	Widespread and common throughout at low- to mid-elevation wetlands offering suitable microhabitat of emergent vegetation such as cattails and small willows. At home in large, natural wetlands of all types but also uses small, shallow wetlands created by human activities, including roadside ditches, waste areas, and agricultural runoff. In Kittitas County, may share breeding marshes with Yellow-headed Blackbirds.	Red-winged Blackbirds can breed colonially, but that may be more as a result of patchy breeding habitats than true colonialism. They are polygynous: males commonly mate with 2 to 4 females and can have as many as 15 mates. Nests are made of grass, and are usually lashed to cattails, bulrushes, or other emergent vegetation close to the water. The female incubates 3 to 4 eggs for 11 to 13 days. She broods the young and brings them food. The male may help feed young at the nest his primary mate, but additional mates do not generally get help from the male. The young leave the nest 11 to 14 days after hatching but stay on the territory for another two weeks. The female (and occasionally the male) feeds the young while they are on the territory and for up to three more weeks after they leave the nesting territory. Females occasionally will raise second broods, but single broods are the norm.	Red-winged Blackbirds are year-round residents across much of their range. Northern breeders migrate to the southern United States, but are usually late-fall migrants and very early arrivals on the breeding grounds.	red-winged_blackbird	RWBL			
13	30	Agelaius	tricolor	Tricolored Blackbird		EN		The Tricolored Blackbird looks much like its near relative, the Red-winged Blackbird. The glossy-black male&#8217;s shoulder patch is a deeper red and is bordered in white rather than yellow, while the female is dark blackish-brown, not reddish-brown. It nests in various types of wetland habitats, forming dense breeding colonies that may relocate from one year to the next if local conditions change.

The arrival and establishment of Tricolored Blackbird in Washington is a story that is still unfolding. There had been no prior state records, even of isolated wandering birds, when a nesting colony was discovered near the town of Wilson Creek (Grant County) in July 1998. This colony has persisted ever since, although the birds depart for points unknown after breeding. Beginning in spring 1999 and continuing every year since then good numbers of Tricolored Blackbirds have been observed outside the breeding season (September&#8211;May, peak February&#8211;April) at ponds near Othello (Adams County), but there are almost no summer records from this location. Another large assembly was first found near Texas Lake (Whitman County) in May 2002; breeding was confirmed there in 2005. Beginning in 2000, birds have also been observed at an increasing number of other locations in Adams, Douglas, Grant, Klickitat, Lincoln, Spokane, and Walla Walla counties, usually of just one or a few birds at a time. The only records west of the Cascades have occurred sporadically in the Vancouver Lowlands (Clark County) during late fall and winter, always of small numbers of Tricoloreds mixed with flocks of other blackbirds. The earliest of these was from November 2000.

The historic breeding range of Tricolored Blackbird is the Central Valley of California, extending south into northern Baja California and north into the Klamath Basin of south central Oregon. Pushing northward over the past century, it has nested in several places not far from the Columbia River boundary with Washington, mostly east of the Cascades but also in the Willamette Valley as far north as Portland. Most Oregon birds are believed to move south to California for the winter, although some remain, especially in the Klamath Valley.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								tricolored_blackbird				
14	6	Aix	sponsa	Wood Duck	Fairly common to locally common resident.	LC	Wood Ducks declined seriously during the late 19th Century due to over-hunting and habitat loss, and were threatened with extinction early in the 20th Century. Legal protection, beginning in 1918 with the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, and major initiatives to provide nest boxes in appropriate habitat have helped the Wood Duck recover to healthy numbers. Expanding beaver populations throughout the Wood Duck's range have also helped the population rebound as beavers create an ideal forested wetland habitat for Wood Ducks.	Male Wood Ducks are flamboyant in breeding plumage, practically unmistakable with their brightly colored chestnut and yellow bodies, green droop-crested heads, bright red bills, and bold white barring on their faces and bodies. Females are drabber, with subtle iridescence on overall grayish-brown bodies, spotted flanks, and a white teardrop surrounding each eye. Juveniles appear similar to females, as do non-breeding males in eclipse plumage (from June to September), although they have the red bill and white facial markings.		1	Rarely seen on marine waters, the Wood Duck is a bird of wooded wetlands and slow-moving, tree-lined rivers, with a preference for deciduous-tree habitats. This cavity-nester requires either a natural cavity or nest box to raise its young.	Wood Ducks are common breeders from March through August in lowlands west of the Cascades. In eastern Washington, they are uncommon in the central Columbia Basin, but found more commonly in the lowlands, especially along major river valleys in northeastern Washington. In winter, they are uncommon, but still present in some areas west of the Cascades, and wintering numbers appear to be increasing.	Wood Ducks forage in the water by taking food from the surface and up-ending to reach food underneath. They also graze on land. Pairs form on the wintering grounds, and males attract females by showing off their brightly colored plumage. Females demonstrate strong fidelity to the sites where they hatched (philopatry), and they lead their mates back to those sites in the spring.	Aquatic plant seeds make up the majority of the diet. Insects and other aquatic invertebrates are also eaten, especially by young birds. In areas with oak trees, acorns are a significant source of food.	Fairly common and widespread in King County in lowlands and Cascade foothills adjacent to open water with nearby stands of trees; much more local in Kitsap and Island Counties in similar habitats. Local at middle elevations in Kittitas County, mainly in riparian habitat along Yakima River Valley. Requires natural nesting cavities in trees or provided boxes near water, but shuns dense forest.	Wood Ducks nest in cavities near or above water, up to 65 feet high. The most common natural cavities are Pileated Woodpecker holes, but artificial nest boxes are used as well. The cavity is lined with down. The female lays 9 to 14 eggs and incubates them for 25 to 35 days. After the female begins incubation, the pair breaks up. After one day in the nest, the young leap to the ground or water, often quite a long jump. The young can swim and feed themselves, but the female continues to tend them for 5 to 6 weeks. She leaves before they can fly, however. They fledge when they are 8 to 9 weeks old.	Many Wood Ducks are short-distance migrants, but almost 75% of the Wood Ducks in the Pacific Flyway are non-migratory. Those that are migratory fly from British Columbia through western Washington and winter in the Central Valley of California. Some western Washington breeders do not appear to be migratory, although most are. Those from eastern Washington are also migratory. Males gather in a post-breeding flock and molt before the fall migration.	wood_duck	WODU			
15	3	Alauda	arvensis	Sky Lark	Rare visitor west.	LC	Sky Larks are widespread and abundant in their native Eurasian range, and are introduced and common in Hawaii. Introduced populations in mainland North America are gradually declining. Urbanization of agricultural lands has reduced suitable habitat on Vancouver Island. Since reaching an all-time high of over 1000 birds in 1965, the population on Vancouver Island declined to around 200 birds by the mid-1990s and is now restricted to four locations. On San Juan Island, Sky Lark habitat is protected as a national park, but without a source population on nearby Vancouver Island, predation from introduced foxes and feral cats has extirpated the breeding population.	The Sky Lark is a small, cryptically colored songbird. Adults have brown upperparts and buff-white underparts with a brownish breast band of short streaks. Juveniles have spotted and speckled upperparts. Sky Larks have a short crest that is often raised. In flight, a white trailing edge is visible on the inner wing.		1	The Sky Lark is native to Eurasia and was introduced to Vancouver Island in the early 1900s. It has since spread to San Juan Island where it occupies dry, open habitats, especially fields of short to moderately tall grass.	Sky Larks were formerly found in open grasslands on San Juan Island and rarely on Lopez Island (San Juan County). A few are still reported from time to time, although they are most likely no longer nesting there. A Sky Lark was recorded in Sequim (Clallam County) a few winters ago. This bird may have been a visitor from Victoria, or a vagrant from the population in eastern Asia.	Flocks form in late July and early August and last until early spring. Sky Larks walk rather than hop, and forage as they walk.  They are monogamous, and residents maintain pair bonds throughout the winter. The Sky Lark is famous for its spectacular aerial display songs, used to attract mates and defend nesting territories. Singing males fly in a steep spiral as high as 150-300 feet, circle for several minutes as they sing, and then spiral slowly back to the ground. The Sky Lark's song is a long trill, a series of high, liquid rolling notes that may include mimicry of other species.	Adults mainly feed on the seeds of grasses, weeds, and grain. The young are raised on beetles and other insects.		Pair formation begins in January when males establish territories with aerial displays. The male also performs a courtship display on the ground when a female lands in his territory to feed. The female deepens a natural hollow and lines it with grass to form a nest. The female usually lays 3-5 eggs, and incubates the eggs by herself. Both parents feed the young. The young leave the nest before they are able to fly. Sky Larks may have two broods per year.	The Sky Lark has become a permanent resident on southern Vancouver Island, British Columbia, and San Juan Island, Washington. It is also a naturally occurring, but rare, vagrant to western Alaska from Asian populations.	sky_lark				
16	46	Alectoris	chukar	Chukar	Fairly common resident east.	LC	The first Chukars were introduced in North America in 1893 and are still released regularly in Washington.  They thrive on overgrazed open ranges where there is no agriculture.  Chukars are one of the most popular upland game species in Washington, ranking second in the state for numbers harvested.  Chukars typically exist in areas unoccupied by other upland birds, thus their introduction does not interfere with native species.	A chunky, medium-sized bird introduced into North America from Eurasia, the Chukar is a pale-colored, but boldly patterned bird. The bird's red bill and legs contrast with its pale gray upperparts.  A black line surrounds the bird's whitish throat and cheek, and extends over its eyes. The Chukar's sides are cream with bold black stripes. Pale orange under-tail coverts and red outer feathers adorn its short gray tail.		1	Chukars can be found on steep, dry, rocky slopes with shrub-steppe vegetation. Because cheatgrass is a major food source, Chukars are often spotted near this introduced grass. They survive at elevations ranging from 500 to 4,000 feet.	Chukars are regularly released to provide opportunities for hunters and thus are often seen outside their regular range.  They are common in rocky, shrub-steppe areas and deep river canyons east of the Cascades in the central and lower Columbia Basin.  They can be found along the Columbia River in Klickitat County, and in the Methow and Okanogan Valleys, in the Banks Lake area, along the lower Yakima River and tributaries, and along the eastern portion of the Snake River.	Often found in small groups, especially in the winter, Chukars feed primarily on the ground, but will climb into shrubs or trees for berries.	In Washington, cheatgrass and wheat seeds make up the majority of the Chukar's diet.  In the winter, Chukars feed primarily on seeds, cheatgrass, and thistles, switching to insects and green leaves in the summer.  Many of the Chukar's major food sources, like the bird itself, have been introduced from Eurasia.	Introduced from southwest Asia. Fairly common to locally common below tree line in eastern Kittitas County, principally along Columbia River slope and Yakima River drainage from Umtanum Creek south. Prefers rocky slopes with shrub-steppe cover, but also found in flatter terrain. Not usually known from agricultural areas. In Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997), projected range north of I-90 and west of R20E, and west of Yakima Canyon south of Ellensburg, not supported by BBA records.	To make the nest, the female creates a depression in the ground and lines it with grass, twigs, and feathers.  The nest is typically hidden under a shrub or rock.  Clutches are large, with 8-14 eggs that the female incubates. Female Chukars sometimes lay a second clutch of eggs that the male will incubate while she continues to incubate the first. Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest to find their own food, although one or both parents will continue to tend them for some time.	Permanent resident	chukar				
17	42	Ammodramus	leconteii	Le Conte's Sparrow		LC		Three spring records from eastern Washington, one fall record from Willapa Bay (Pacific County).		1								le_contes_sparrow				
18	42	Ammodramus	nelsoni	Nelson's Sharp-tailed Sparrow		LC		One record, from Sullivan Lake (Pend Oreille County) in September 1986.		1								nelsons_sharp-tailed_sparrow				
19	42	Ammodramus	savannarum	Grasshopper Sparrow	Uncommon summer resident east.	LC	Breeding Bird Survey data have shown significant declines in Grasshopper Sparrow populations throughout North America, and in the West generally.  However in Washington, The Survey shows a small, not statistically significant increase between 1980 and 2002. Surveys may under-represent this species, as its song is very high pitched and near the limit of human hearing, and thus many people may miss it on counts. Grasshopper Sparrows were more numerous before large tracts of shrub-steppe habitat were converted to intensive agriculture.  The Conservation Reserve Program, which sets aside fields of perennial grasses and does not allow plowing or grazing, has added considerable Grasshopper Sparrow habitat to eastern Washington in recent years.  Grasshopper Sparrows may be a species of successional habitats, moving in after a fire for a few years until the brush gets too thick again, then moving on.	The Grasshopper Sparrow is an inconspicuous grassland sparrow with a short tail and a proportionally large, flat head.  It has a plain face, with a white eye-ring and a white stripe through the middle of its crown.  Its back is intricately patterned with gray and chestnut, a color combination that is unique among Washington's sparrows.  It has an entirely clear, buff-colored breast, with no streaks or spot.  Juveniles are streaked overall until they reach adult plumage at the end of their first summer.		1	A grassland bird, the Grasshopper Sparrow appears to prefer areas with significant grass cover and a few scattered shrubs for perching.  They don't use habitats with dense shrub cover or sites that have been over-grazed.  During migration and winter, they will use many types of open fields.	Grasshopper Sparrows are fairly selective about habitat, but range from common to uncommon in grasslands throughout much of eastern Washington.  They are absent from the Methow Valley but can be found in the Columbia Basin grasslands, at the Ponderosa pine border in central and southern Spokane County.  They can also be found in the small Palouse prairie fragments at the Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge (also in Spokane County).  The Kahlotus Ridgetop Preserve (Franklin County) and lands in the Conservation Reserve Program are also potential breeding locations, as is the area north of Moses Lake.	Grasshopper Sparrows are not typically a flocking species. They run or walk along the ground when foraging. A secretive bird, the Grasshopper Sparrow will fly a short distance when flushed, and then drop back into the grass out of sight.  They usually stay out of sight unless they are singing, when they will perch on a weed stalk, shrub, or fence wire and belt out their buzzy song.  The Grasshopper Sparrow's song sounds like the buzz of a grasshopper.	Seeds and insects are part of their diet year round, but the ratio of animal and vegetable matter fluctuates throughout the year.  The winter diet is made up primarily of weed and grass seed, as well as waste grain.  In summer, insects, especially grasshoppers, make up a larger part of the diet.	Limited to Kittitas County below ponderosa pine zone, where apparently rare and local in degraded shrub-steppe habitats with significant grass cover. Recorded only twice during atlas period, both times from Yakima Training Center. Described as common in burned-over sagebrush tracts in Yakima County portion of military reservation (Stepniewski 1999); doubtless under-recorded by BBA surveyors in Kittitas County portion due to inadequate coverage under controlled-access conditions. Scattered reports after close of atlas period from transitional grassy steppe on edges of Kittitas Valley may represent nomadic responses to changing habitats, as noted by Smith et al. (1997).	Males sing from perches to defend their territories and advertise for a mate.  Females arrive on the breeding grounds a few days after the males.  Pair bonds are usually monogamous, but polygyny is not unheard of.  The nest is well hidden on the ground, usually placed in a slight depression so the rim of the nest is level with the ground.  The female builds the open cup of dry grass and lines it with finer grass, rootlets, and hair.  It is usually partly domed, with grass woven into overhanging vegetation creating a back and sides to the nest, leaving a side entrance.  The female incubates the 4-5 eggs for 11-13 days.  Both parents help feed the young, who leave the nest after 8-9 days.  When they leave the nest, the young are not yet able to fly well, and the parents continue to provide care for 4-19 more days.	The migratory Grasshopper Sparrow arrives in Washington in May and leaves in August.  Their secretive behavior makes it difficult to document their migration, but it is believed that the fall migration is prolonged.	grasshopper_sparrow				
20	42	Amphispiza	belli	Sage Sparrow	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	Washington breeders are the northern subspecies of Sage Sparrow, which may be split into multiple species at a future time.  This is a disjunct population, that is, it is geographically isolated from the majority of the population that is found in the Great Basin. Increased development and destruction of shrub-steppe habitat have contributed to a range-wide decline in the Sage Sparrow population. Less than 20% of the existing steppe area in eastern Washington is considered preferred Sage Sparrow habitat, and much of that is patchily distributed. Over half of their former habitat has been converted to agriculture, and fires in these areas also contribute to habitat loss. Sage Sparrows abandon habitat that has been taken over by cheatgrass--an exotic grass that has invaded much of Washington's shrub-steppe habitat and continues to invade recently burned areas. The Breeding Bird Survey has shown a decline in Washington over the past 25 years that should be of concern, and the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife has identified the Sage Sparrow as a candidate for state endangered species protection. Audubon~Washington, Partners in Flight, and the Washington GAP Analysis project all include the Sage Sparrow on their lists of at-risk species.	The adult Sage Sparrow has a dark spot in the middle of its clear, white breast and streaked, buff sides. The upperparts are gray-brown; there are no streaks on the back and only light streaks on the wings. The Sage Sparrow's tail is long, narrow, and black, with thin white edges. The head is gray, with a white cheek stripe and black throat stripe below. The eye has a white eye-ring and a white spot above and in front of the eye. Juveniles are overall streaked brown and buff.		1	Restricted to open shrub lands and grasslands, Washington's Sage Sparrows are found in hot, dry areas of eastern Washington with mature big sagebrush stands. These sparrows seem to prefer sites with sparse shrub cover, arranged in patches, with bare ground in between.  During migration they are rarely seen, but can be found in almost all sagebrush habitat, including degraded sage, in eastern Washington.	Sage Sparrows are common to uncommon breeders in sagebrush landscapes of the Columbia Basin.  They are rare breeders in the Okanogan Valley, and possible breeders in the Methow Valley.  Not much is known about this species' exact habitat requirements, and large areas of sagebrush that appear to be suitable habitat are often lacking Sage Sparrows.  Some areas where they can be found relatively commonly from March through July, and to a lesser extent to mid-August, are the Quilomene Wildlife Area (Kittitas County), the Yakama Indian Reservation, from Dry Creek along the Horse Heaven Hills to Mabton, the southern end of the Yakima Training Center (Yakima County), the Wahluke Slope (Franklin County), and Sagebrush Flats (Douglas County).	They can be found foraging in small flocks starting in late June.  Most of their foraging takes place on the ground. While foraging, they hop or walk, but run across open spaces.  The Sage Sparrow is often seen running along the ground with its tail cocked up. When perched on shrubs, it often pumps its tail up and down like a phoebe.	Seeds and insects make up the majority of the Sage Sparrow's diet year round.  Seasonal variations are similar to that of most sparrows, with insects more commonly a part of the diet in the breeding season.  The young are fed insects.	Fairly common but local in shrub-steppe of southeastern Kittitas County, mostly within Yakima Training Center and southern portion of Quilomene Wildlife Area. True breeding range, as revealed by BBA surveys, somewhat smaller and more compact than that predicted and mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997), with no supporting records west of Yakima River and none along Columbia River north of Skookumchuck Creek drainage. Declines in Washington populations appear to correlate with disappearance of high-quality stands of mature big sagebrush, yet Sage Sparrow not recorded in some seemingly appropriate sagebrush stands.	The male returns to the same nesting site each year and defends a territory by singing from a high perch. The male returns from the wintering grounds usually already paired with a female, and the pair bond is monogamous through the breeding season. Early nests are usually on the ground, but later in the season, nests are placed in the shrub canopy, in the densest areas, usually within four feet of the ground. Nest shrubs are generally higher than most of the surrounding shrubs. The female builds a bulky cup with an outer shell made of coarse grasses and twigs. The initial lining is made of fine grasses and bark, and then a second lining of feathers, wool, or other animal hair is added. The female incubates the 3 to 4 eggs (usually 3) for 10 to 16 days. Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest at 9 to 10 days. Fledglings cannot fly when they leave the nest, and the parents continue to provide food for the young.  Pairs will typically raise two broods, but have been known to raise as many as three broods in a season.	Sage Sparrows in Washington are migratory, spending the winter in southern deserts.  They are one of our earliest migrants; many arrive before March.  They are typically gone by mid-September.	sage_sparrow				
21	42	Amphispiza	bilineata	Black-throated Sparrow	Rare summer east. Casual west.	LC	Throughout its range, the Black-throated Sparrow has declined in areas with increasing development. They do not adapt well to suburban environments, however they are still widespread and common in appropriate habitat. In Washington, at the northern edge of their range, numbers vary considerably each year, but are always quite low, with never more than a few pairs breeding. They are not likely to ever be common in Washington. The increased grass cover in Washington's shrub-steppe communities may inhibit more widespread breeding of Black-throated Sparrows.	The Black-throated Sparrow is a small, gray sparrow that has a distinctive black throat, with a bold white stripe above its eye and another down its cheek. Adults are not streaked. The black tail is outlined in white except at the tips of the middle tail feathers. Juveniles, who retain this plumage into October, lack the black throat of adults and are lightly streaked.		1	Black-throated Sparrows use a variety of dry, open, grassy or shrubby habitats, including sagebrush and creosote bush deserts. In Washington, they favor degraded or otherwise gravelly soils.	Black-throated Sparrows have been rare and local breeders since 1987 along the Columbia River south of Vantage, in and around Wanapum State Park (Kittitas County). In 1994, singing males were reported at several sites in the central Columbia Basin (Grant, Yakima, Klickitat, Benton, and Kittitas Counties) which may have coincided with extreme drought conditions farther south. No birds were reported in 1995, but in 1996 several were reported in eastern Washington.	In winter, loose flocks feed on open ground. They walk or run, often with their tails cocked upward. Males sing from atop low bushes.	Adapted to dry habitats, Black-throated Sparrows can survive long periods of time without supplemental water, obtaining moisture from the seeds and insects that make up their diet. In the hottest part of the summer, however, supplemental water is necessary. In the winter, seeds make up the majority of their diet. During the breeding and nestling season, insects become more important. When available, berries and other fruits, as well as fresh green shoots, are also part of their diet.	Rare, irregular, and extremely local breeder in dry, rocky areas along Columbia River in southeastern Kittitas County. Prefers lowest, hottest, degraded shrub-steppe. Although confirmed as breeder during atlas period, Black-throated Sparrow absent most years, apparently responding to fluctuations in climatic conditions in core range in Great Basin and farther south.	The timing of the breeding season may vary depending on rainfall and available food. The male sings to defend its nesting territory and to attract a female, and they form a monogamous pair. The nest is located in a low shrub, well hidden and close to or on the ground. The nest is an open cup of grass, small twigs, and other plant fibers, lined with fine grass, plant down, and hair. The female incubates the 3-4 eggs for 12-15 days. The female broods, and both parents feed the young. They leave the nest at 10-11 days, and most pairs raise two broods each year.	Black-throated Sparrows are migratory, and the northern limit of their breeding range may change from year to year, occasionally extending farther northward. They winter in the southwestern United States and Mexico.	black-throated_sparrow				
22	6	Anas	acuta	Northern Pintail	Common winter resident, uncommon breeder.	LC	Widespread and common throughout North America, Europe, and Asia, the Northern Pintail is probably one of the most numerous species of duck worldwide. Numbers in North America vary a great deal from year to year, although some surveys have recorded significant, long-term declines since the 1960s.  Predators and farming operations destroy many thousands of Northern Pintail nests each year.  Farming has also affected nesting habitat.  Pintails appear to be responding to new conservation practices, however, including habitat restoration and tighter restrictions on hunting, and numbers seem to be increasing.  If these practices are maintained, Northern Pintails should be able to maintain a healthy population in North America.	Slim and long-necked, Northern Pintails have an elegant appearance on water and in flight. The male in breeding plumage has a dark brown head, white breast and throat, and a white line extending up the neck. The body is light gray with black-edged feathers, and the belly is white. The rump and the long tail are black.  The female is mottled brown-and-black with a pointed tail and dark bronze speculum on its wing. Both sexes have gray legs and a dark gray bill, although the bill of the male is lined with blue on the sides. Males in eclipse plumage are similar to females, but are grayer, with some white remaining on the sides of the neck.		1	During the breeding season, Northern Pintails use shallow ponds and marshes in open areas. In winter they can be found around shallow wetlands, exposed mudflats, flooded fields, or lakes. During migration, they have been seen in offshore waters.	Northern Pintails are uncommon breeders in freshwater ponds and wetlands in the central Columbia Basin. The majority of Pintails breeding in Washington can be found in southern Grant and Adams Counties. In western Washington, some birds breed in less-developed parts of the southern Puget Trough, but summer sightings are most often non-breeders.  During migration and winter, Northern Pintails are very common birds on the coast and in Puget Sound.  They are most common in western Washington from late August to early May.  In eastern Washington, they may be found all year.	Northern Pintails are wary, especially during their flightless stage in late summer, when they are highly secretive. They will forage on land, but find most of their food by dabbling in shallow, muddy water.	In fall and winter, Northern Pintails eat seeds and waste grain. In spring and summer, roots and new shoots as well as aquatic invertebrates make up the majority of the diet. As with many other species of duck, the young eat a greater proportion of invertebrates than the adults.	No conclusive evidence of breeding in four-county area during BBA period, and none predicted by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Just four BBA records: three from Crockett Lake on Whidbey Island, one near Auburn in King County. Very rare breeder in western Washington lowlands, with one confimed BBA record from Nisqually National Wildlife Refuge in Thurston County (Smith et al. 1997). Confirmed nesting record from King County in 1982 (Hunn 1982) predates atlas period.	Pairing begins on the wintering grounds and continues through spring migration. Northern Pintails are among the earliest nesters, and arrive on the breeding grounds as soon as they are free of ice. The nest is located on dry ground in short vegetation. It is usually near water, but may be up to half a mile away from the nearest body of water. Pintail nests are often more exposed than other ducks' nests. The nest is a shallow depression, built by the female and made of grass, twigs, or leaves, lined with down. Incubation of the 6 to 10 eggs lasts from 21 to 25 days and is done by the female alone. The pair bond dissolves shortly after the female begins incubation, when the males gather in flocks to molt. Within a few hours of hatching, the young follow the female from the nest site. They can feed themselves, but the female continues to tend them until they fledge at 38 to 52 days. In the far north where continuous daylight allows for round-the-clock feeding, the young develop faster.	Northern Pintails are early-fall migrants and begin to arrive on their wintering grounds starting in August, although the peak of the fall migration is in October in eastern Washington and November in western Washington.  The northward migration begins early in the spring, from late February to mid-May, peaking in March and early April.  Many Pintail flocks migrate from Siberia across the Bering Strait to winter in North America.	northern_pintail	NOPI			
23	6	Anas	americana	American Wigeon	Common migrant, winter resident. Uncommon breeder east.	LC	The American Wigeon population experienced a major, drought-induced decline in the early 1980s, cutting the population almost in half. By 1997, the population had steadily recovered to near-former levels and is considered stable. The breeding grounds are fairly stable for this far-north breeder, although migration stopover and wintering sites are threatened by the loss of wetlands that has occurred throughout the United States.	A small duck with a short bill and round head, the American Wigeon has a reddish-brown body, and a speckled grayish head that is plain in females and boldly patterned in males. Its bill is blue-gray with a narrow black border at the base, and its feet are dark gray. Apparent in flight, the speculum, or wing-patch, is dark iridescent-green, looking black at times, with white on the forewing. The male has distinctive, black undertail coverts, a white forehead, and iridescent green band sweeping back from the eye. Females, juveniles, and eclipse-plumage males lack these markings. Males are usually in eclipse plumage in the post-breeding, pre-migration period from July to September.		1	In the summer, large inland marshes are the preferred habitat of the American Wigeon. During migration and in winter they frequent a variety of freshwater and saltwater wetlands. They are commonly found grazing on land, but also spend more time than other dabbling ducks in deep water.	American Wigeons breed in freshwater wetlands in the northeastern corner of the state. Breeding occurs uncommonly in other parts of eastern Washington and in a few areas on Puget Sound (Everett in Snohomish County and Kent in King County). The majority of the American Wigeon's breeding range is north of Washington. The wintering population, however, is denser in the Pacific Northwest than anywhere else in their range, and American Wigeons are common in wetland habitats throughout the state in the non-breeding season. Hybrid American-Eurasian Wigeons are regularly found during winter in Washington.	American Wigeons use a variety of foraging strategies. They pick food from the surface of shallow wetlands, graze in open fields, and steal food from coots and diving ducks. Wigeons will feed day or night, with much night foraging occurring during the hunting season.	The majority of the diet is plant material, especially young shoots, roots, and seeds. Waste grains are also an important food source in agricultural areas. The wigeon's bill is more goose-like than the bill of most dabblers, facilitating grazing. Females during the breeding season and the young eat many aquatic invertebrates, but aside from that, wigeons are plant-eaters.	No confirmed breeding records in four-county area during BBA period and not modeled to nest there by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Rare and local breeder in western Washington lowlands, with one confirmed BBA record in Snohomish County and another in Clallam County (Smith et al. 1997); one earlier King County report of a brood at Kent in 1980 (Hunn 1982). Two Kittitas County BBA records, from Kittitas Valley north of Ellensburg and from Vantage.	Pair bonds begin to form on the wintering grounds, and most older birds are paired before spring migration. One of the most northerly dabbling ducks, breeding as far north as the edge of the tundra, American Wigeons begin nesting later in the season than other dabblers. Nests are built on dry land, or islands, usually within 100 feet of water and well concealed by thick vegetation. The female builds the nest which is a shallow depression filled with weeds and grasses, lined with down. She lays 8 to 11 eggs and incubates them for 22 to 25 days. The male stays until incubation begins, but leaves before the eggs hatch. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and swim and feed themselves, although the female continues to protect and tend them until they fledge at 45 to 63 days old.	When males leave their mates, they migrate to open lakes where they join other males and molt. Once the flightless molt period is complete, the true fall migration is gradual, lasting from late July through December. In western Washington, the fall migration peaks from mid-October to early December. In eastern Washington, the peak is from early October to mid-November. Spring migration lasts from mid-February to early May.	american_wigeon	AMWI			
24	6	Anas	clypeata	Northern Shoveler	Common resident.	LC	Due to their highly specialized bills and consequent habitat requirements, the Northern Shoveler appears to be less affected by drought and food scarcity than other dabblers. This may explain how this species has maintained long-term stable populations.	The very large, spatulate bill is the most distinguishing feature of the aptly named Northern Shoveler. The male in breeding plumage has bright wings, a bright iridescent-green head with a yellow eye, bold white breast, and chestnut sides. Females, juveniles, and males in eclipse plumage (from May through August) are mottled brown with orange legs and a green-black iridescent speculum with a blue patch on the forewing.		1	Northern Shovelers inhabit shallow, marshy ponds and wetlands at low elevations. Breeding habitat is in open country (prairie or tundra), or lowland woodlands and clearings, always near shallow water. During winter and migration they will use virtually any wetland as long as it has muddy edges. Shovelers will forage in sewage ponds and stagnant or polluted waters avoided by other species of ducks.	The Northern Shoveler is a common breeder throughout Washington's lowland ponds and wetlands (although some birds sighted in summer on the west side of the Cascades are non-breeders). It is also a common winter resident. Northern Shovelers are more common breeders on the east side of the Cascades than on the west side, but more common wintering on the west side in appropriate habitat.	Northern Shovelers rarely tip up, but filter mud through their bills, swimming with their heads outstretched, bills skimming the water's surface, sifting out food. In flight they stay in tight bunches, weaving to and fro like shorebirds. Shovelers are the most territorial of all the North American dabblers, and pair bonds remain intact through incubation, unlike most other species of ducks.	The bill of the Shoveler is ideally suited for straining small swimming invertebrates from the water and mud. Seeds and aquatic plants are also important food items, especially during winter.	Uncommon in shallow freshwater ponds and wetlands at low elevations in western King County and on Whidbey Island. Single Kittitas County record from man-made pond near Kittitas. Other, similar impoundments in Kittitas Valley offer appropriate habitat that may support breeding. Such features fall below mapping resolution of Washington Gap project (Smith et al. 1997), which predicts breeding only along Columbia River shoreâ??an assumption not supported by BBA surveys.	Pair formation begins in the winter and continues during spring migration. Males remain with the females through the incubation period. The female chooses the site (generally in short grass). She builds the nest, a shallow depression made of grass and weeds, lined with down, and incubates the 9 to 12 eggs for 23 to 28 days by herself. A few hours after they hatch, the female leads the young to the water where they can swim and forage immediately. The young typically stay close to the cover of emergent vegetation, and the female tends them until they fledge at 52 to 66 days of age.	Northern Shovelers migrate in flocks in a prolonged migration period in both the spring and the fall. The spring migration is relatively late, usually peaking about the end of April. The fall migration begins in August, peaks in September, and continues into November. Many Northern Shovelers winter in Washington.	northern_shoveler	NSHO			
25	6	Anas	crecca	Green-winged Teal	Common winter resident. Fairly common breeder east.	LC	With 80% of the North American Green-winged Teal population breeding north of the United States-Canada border, most of the breeding grounds are away from human activity, and thus numbers have remained fairly stable and are even increasing in some areas. In 1990 the population was estimated at over 3,000,000 birds. The Common Teal, or Eurasian Green-winged Teal, a Eurasian subspecies of the Green-winged Teal, is recorded in small numbers in Washington in most years, and sightings have become more common, especially in the late winter and early spring. The increase in sightings may be due to an increase in birds, or an increase in reporting rates due to more birders out there looking for them. The Common Teal is currently considered the same species (although a different subspecies) as the Green-winged Teal in North America. However, British ornithologists recently split the two into different species, and some speculate that the American Ornithologists Union will soon follow their lead.	The smallest dabbling duck, the Green-winged Teal is smaller and more compact than other teals and has a round head and narrow bill.  All sexes and ages have dark gray wings with green-black speculums and a brown bar above each speculum.  Females and juveniles are mottled brown overall with gray legs.  Males in breeding plumage have gray bodies with orange-buff, dark-spotted breasts and yellow patches on their flanks.  Their rumps are black and buff, and their rufous heads have an iridescent green band swooping back in a curve on each side.  They also have a vertical white shoulder-bar on each side, which can be a helpful field mark when trying to distinguish the Green-winged Teal from the Eurasian race.		1	The Green-winged Teal lives in shallow wetlands, preferring fresh water for breeding, but is resident on both fresh and salt water at other times of the year. Nesting habitat usually has trees and shrubs. During winter and migration, wetlands with a lot of emergent and floating vegetation are commonly used.  Tidal mudflats are used by this species more often than by any other duck.	In western Washington, the Green-winged Teal is a rare breeder around Puget Sound. It is much more familiar as a wintering species, common from September to early May, especially in tidal marshes and flooded fields throughout the lowlands of coastal and western Washington. Most birds seen west of the Cascades during the summer are non-breeders. In eastern Washington, Green-winged Teals breed in the Columbia River Basin and the northern river valleys, especially at the confluence of the Okanogan and Columbia Rivers, Potholes Reservoir (Grant County), and Lake Lenore (Douglas/Grant Counties), and can be found in these and other wetlands with appropriate habitat throughout the year.	Green-winged Teals usually gather in smallish flocks, but large flocks of thousands are also seen. Active and agile, they forage in emergent vegetation along shorelines and in wet, shallow, muddy areas, mainly by dabbling their bills at the water's surface.  Because of their small size and rapid wing-beats, these birds in flight appear to move very fast.	The Green-winged Teal's diet is variable depending on season and location, with more animal matter consumed during the spring and summer, and more plants eaten in the fall and winter. Plant matter usually consists of the seeds of grasses, sedges, and pond-weeds.  Animal matter is most often insect larvae, other aquatic invertebrates, and sometimes fish eggs.	Uncommon breeder in low-elevation freshwater bodies and wetlands on Whidbey Island and in King County lowlands. East of Cascades, scattered mid-elevation records from Keechelus Lake to edge of shrub-steppe zone. Only two confirmed records, one near Maxwelton on south Whidbey Island, another near Kittitas in eastern Kittitas Valley. Most likely to nest in wetlands with shrubby vegetation or small trees. Breeding range along Yakima and Columbia Rivers predicted by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) but not borne out by BBA surveys.	Green-winged Teals usually arrive at the breeding grounds with pair bonds formed. Nests are usually located in grasses and weeds in meadows, open woodlands, or brush, and are usually within two hundred feet of water. The female builds the nest on the ground. It is well hidden by low vegetation that often is dense enough to form a full canopy over the nest. The nest itself is usually a shallow depression, filled with grasses, twigs, and leaves, lined with down. Incubation is by the female alone, and lasts for 20 to 24 days, during which time the pair bond dissolves, and the male leaves the nesting area. Within a few hours of hatching, the 8 to 9 ducklings leave the nest with the female to look for their own food. They may all return to the nest at night for a few days. The young fledge at about 35 days.	Nearly all populations of Green-winged Teal are migratory, although they remain farther north during the winter than other species of North American teal.  After incubation begins, the males migrate to molting grounds where they gather and go through a period of flightlessness.  The molt migration may be to a spot close by, or may be over one hundred miles away.  Fall migration occurs over an extended period, beginning in late August and stretching into early December.  Females may move farther south than males.  Spring migration usually begins in February and lasts through April.  They often migrate over the ocean, sometimes in association with sea ducks.	green-winged_teal	GWTE			
26	6	Anas	cyanoptera	Cinnamon Teal	Fairly common to locally common summer resident, rare in winter.	LC	The Cinnamon Teal is a western species and is the most common breeding teal in Washington. It is more limited in range than most North American dabbling ducks and as such, is one of the least abundant of this group, with an estimated population of about 300,000 birds. Its limited range and early fall migration protect it from high levels of hunting, and numbers appear to be stable. In the past century, however, humans have changed the landscape in such a way as to favor the Blue-winged Teal in some areas at the expense of the Cinnamon Teal. This may become a matter of concern if this trend continues.	In many ways, the striking Cinnamon Teal is similar to the Blue-winged Teal and the Northern Shoveler, intermediate in size and overlapping habitat. The male Cinnamon Teal in breeding plumage is one of the most striking of Washington's waterfowl, with a deep, overall cinnamon color and red eyes. Females, juveniles, and males in eclipse plumage are mottled brown and look very similar to the closely related female Blue-winged Teal. However the Cinnamon Teal is slightly larger and has a longer, wider bill. Both sexes have green-black speculums with pale blue patches on the forewing.		1	Cinnamon Teal are found in small, shallow, freshwater wetlands with emergent vegetation.	Females, juveniles, and males in eclipse plumage (from July to September) can be difficult to distinguish from Blue-winged Teal, but Cinnamon Teal are the most common teal in most areas in Washington. They are much more common in eastern Washington, but can be found throughout the state in appropriate low-lying wetland habitat from early April to the end of September. They are extremely rare in these habitats the rest of the year.	Cinnamon Teal forage in shallow water, swimming forward with their heads partly submerged and filtering mud through their bills. These birds sometimes follow each other, taking advantage of food stirred up by the first bird. They occasionally feed on land near water. Cinnamon Teal, like most dabblers, form pairs before arriving on the breeding grounds.	Aquatic plant seeds and invertebrates make up the majority of the Cinnamon Teal's diet. The invertebrates become more important in the spring and summer, when breeding females and growing young need a high-protein diet.	Uncommon breeder in King County lowlands. Uncommon and local on Whidbey Island with breeding confirmed only near Penn Cove. No BBA records from Kitsap County, although breeding predicted there by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Fairly common locally in Kittitas Valley. Single record of midsummer pair at Sentinel Gap hints at limited breeding along Columbia River. Cinnamon Teal typically found in freshwater ponds and wetlands at low- and mid-elevation sites.	The nest is typically located close to water where it is concealed in dense cover. It is a shallow depression with dead grass and weeds, lined with down. The female selects the site, builds the nest, and incubates 9 to 10 eggs for 21 to 25 days without the help of the male. The male stays at the breeding area during most of the incubation, however, and may guard the female. Shortly after the young hatch, they leave the nest for the water and find their own food. The male Cinnamon Teal has occasionally been seen with the female and her young brood, an occurrence unusual in ducks. The female (occasionally with the help of the male) continues to tend the young until they fledge at about 7 weeks of age.	The Cinnamon Teal is highly migratory, beginning its fall migration early, peaking in August and September. It is rare on the breeding grounds by November. The spring migration begins in late March, but doesn't peak until late April into May. The molt migration for males, from the breeding grounds to the sites where they gather and molt, typically occurs in mid-July, before the birds head south again.	cinnamon_teal	CITE			
27	6	Anas	discors	Blue-winged Teal	Fairly common to locally common summer resident, mostly east.	LC	Numbers of Blue-winged Teal nesting in Washington have increased dramatically in the last century. Blue-winged Teal now outnumber Cinnamon Teal in some parts of eastern Washington. This shift is most likely due to large damming projects that have converted small wetlands into large reservoirs more favorable to the Blue-winged than the Cinnamon Teal.	Blue-winged Teal are small dabblers with long bodies and bills. Males in breeding plumage have russet-colored bodies with small, dark spots, black undertail coverts, and white patches on their flanks. Their heads are dark blue-gray with a distinctive white crescent in front of each eye. Males are in non-breeding or eclipse plumage from July to October, during which time they look like females and can easily be confused with Cinnamon Teal in the same plumage. Juveniles and females are mottled brown with a dark bill and yellowish legs. Both males and females have green-black speculums, with pale blue patches on the forewing.		1	Blue-winged Teal inhabit shallow wetlands with emergent vegetation. Their breeding habitat is usually open-country wetlands. During migration they are sometimes found over the ocean, many miles from shore.	Blue-winged Teal are extremely rare in Washington during winter. They typically arrive in mid-April and depart by the end of September. West of the Cascades they are uncommon breeders, and their range is somewhat limited to freshwater wetlands in the Puget Trough and coastal areas. In eastern Washington, they are common in wetlands throughout the region.	Fast and agile flyers, Blue-winged Teal are often seen in small flocks, twisting and turning as a single unit. When foraging they usually stick to very shallow water, plucking food items from the surface and swimming with their heads partially submerged. They do not tend to up-end or feed out of the water.	Like other dabblers, Blue-winged Teal eat grass and aquatic plant seeds, as well as insects and other aquatic invertebrates. These invertebrates make up a larger proportion of their diet than that of other dabblers.	Fairly common in summer in freshwater bodies in King County lowlands, but just two confirmed BBA records near Auburn. Rare in Island County (no confirmed records) and absent from Kitsap County. In Kittitas County, scattered records include two from Kittitas Valley (one confirmed). Single record along Columbia River barely supports breeding predicted there by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Occurrences from higher elevations&#8212;e.g., record of 14 June 1992 in Gold Creek Valley in Kittitas County&#8212;as well as many lowland records may represent migrants, since spring migration for this species continues well into June.	Pair formation begins in the winter and continues through spring migration. Blue-winged Teal nest on the ground in prairies, coastal meadows, and other open areas. Nests are usually near water, but may be several hundred yards away. The nest is a shallow depression with some grass or weeds, lined with down and usually well concealed by vegetation. The female incubates 9 to 13 eggs alone for 23 to 24 days. The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and can swim and find their own food immediately. The female continues to protect and tend them for a few weeks, but she leaves them before they are old enough to fly, which happens around 38 to 49 days.	Blue-winged Teal are highly migratory and are, for the most part, absent from the majority of North America during the cold months of the year. They winter more extensively in South America than any other dabbler. They begin migrating later in spring than other dabblers, with birds arriving on the coast as early as March, but mostly not before April and May. Single males arrive first, with pairs and unpaired females following. Males migrate again from mid-July to mid-August, moving to larger marshes to undergo their molt. Fall migration starts in early August, and most birds are gone by mid-October.	blue-winged_teal	BWTE			
28	6	Anas	falcata	Falcated Duck	Accidental visitor. Washington Bird Records Committee review list species.	NT		Once known as the Falcated Teal, this East Asian native is about the size of the Gadwall and the American Wigeon, but with a heavier-bodied, larger-headed appearance. The spectacular male has an iridescent green- and coppery-toned head, white throat, mostly gray body, and long, sickle-shaped tertial feathers curving downward over the rump and tail. The female is similar to the female wigeon, but plainer, with a black bill.

The Falcated Duck breeds from southern Siberia to northeast China, Korea, and northern Japan, wintering to southern Japan, east and south China, and Vietnam. It is a rare vagrant to the Aleutian Islands and rarer still along the Pacific Coast of North America. Washington has three records, all from near coasts: January 1979 from the Naselle River (Pacific County), July 1993 at Sequim (Clallam County), and February&ndash;March 2002 at Samish Island (Skagit County). In British Columbia, a Falcated Duck returned to Tofino on Vancouver Island for three winters in a row, to 1996. Another bird has wintered at Coburg, Oregon, for four years through 2007.

<i>Revised June 2007</i>		1								falcated_duck				
29	6	Anas	formosa	Baikal Teal	Accidental visitor. Washington Bird Records Committee review list species.	LC		The head of the breeding-plumaged male Baikal Teal is arrestingly patterned in green, buff, black, and white. Vertical white bands separate the gray sides from the dull rosy-brown breast and black undertail. Colorful pointed scapulars overhang the rear flanks and tail. Females, juveniles, and non-breeding-plumaged males are rather similar to the comparable plumages of the somewhat smaller Green-winged Teal, but more reddish-brown overall and with a distinctive white spot on the face at the base of the bill.

The Baikal Teal breeds on tundra and taiga in central and eastern Siberia, winters in southern and eastern China and southern Japan, and is a casual vagrant to Alaska and down the coast to California. This highly decorative duck has long been popular in waterfowl collections, which complicates the question of birds found in the wild. In the past most records were assumed to be escaped birds. Such was the case of a male Baikal Teal shot from a flock of Green-winged Teal at Dungeness (Clallam County) in January 1920. A more recent record of a long-staying visitor near Kent (King County) in winter 2004&#8211;2005 has been accepted by the Washington Bird Records Committee. Oregon and British Columbia each have one record as well.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								baikal_teal				
30	6	Anas	penelope	Eurasian Wigeon	Uncommon winter resident.	LC	Numbers of Eurasian Wigeons reported in North America have increased in recent decades, which may be due to increased reporting, or to an actual increase of birds. It is possible they are breeding at an unknown site somewhere in North America. Hybrids of Eurasian Wigeons and American Wigeons have been recorded.	This winter visitor from Siberia is a close relative of the American Wigeon. The male Eurasian Wigeon in breeding plumage has a salmon-colored breast, pale gray body, and black undertail coverts. His head is dark rufous with a yellowish forehead. The wing has a green speculum with white coverts (the white is absent on the female), much like the American Wigeon. Juveniles and males in eclipse plumage (from July to September) look like the female. Female Eurasian and American Wigeons appear very similar, but the female Eurasian lacks the black border at the base of the bill.  The main features that distinguish the Eurasian Wigeon from the American Wigeon are the gray sides and the russet face-markings. The Eurasian Wigeon hybridizes occasionally with the American Wigeon, and these birds, which show a mixture of characteristics, are seen in Washington with regularity.		1	Eurasian Wigeons inhabit marshes, lakes, bays, and fields.	The Eurasian Wigeon is a regular winter visitor to Washington's coasts and western lowlands. Many large flocks of wintering American Wigeons contain at least one Eurasian. They are also found less commonly in eastern Washington during migration and winter.	In North America, Eurasian Wigeons are almost always found in flocks of American Wigeons.  The foraging strategies of the Eurasian Wigeon include picking food from the surface of shallow water, grazing in upland areas, and feeding on vegetation brought up by coots and diving ducks.	Leaves, stems, roots, and seeds make up the bulk of the diet. Insects are also taken in the summer.		Eurasian Wigeons are known to breed only in Europe and Asia, although they are likely to be found breeding in North America eventually. They nest on the ground under dense vegetation, usually near water. The nest is a shallow depression lined with grass and down. The female incubates 8 to 9 eggs for 24 to 25 days. The young leave the nest and head for water shortly after hatching. They find their own food, although the female continues to tend them until they fledge at 40 to 45 days.	Eurasian Wigeons are known to breed only in Europe and Asia, although they are likely to be found breeding in North America eventually. They nest on the ground under dense vegetation, usually near water. The nest is a shallow depression lined with grass and down. The female incubates 8 to 9 eggs for 24 to 25 days. The young leave the nest and head for water shortly after hatching. They find their own food, although the female continues to tend them until they fledge at 40 to 45 days.	eurasian_wigeon	EUWI			
31	6	Anas	platyrhynchos	Mallard	Common resident.	LC	Although numbers fluctuate considerably and are probably reduced from historical levels, the Mallard is still one of the most abundant ducks in the world. It is a generalist and has adapted to living in close association with humans. Numbers have increased historically in eastern North America.	Perhaps the most familiar duck in the Northwest, the Mallard is a large and heavy bird. Males have gray bodies with chestnut-brown breasts, white collars, iridescent-green heads, and yellow bills. Females are mottled brown-and-black with lighter brown heads and necks and yellow bills mottled with black. They have a black stripe running horizontally through the eye. Both sexes have orange feet and a blue speculum, or wing-patch, bordered in white on two sides, best seen in flight. From June to September, immatures and males, which are then in non-breeding (eclipse) plumage, look much like females.		1	Shallow marshes are the preferred habitat, although Mallards are found virtually everywhere there is open water, from city parks to subalpine lakes. Although they favor fresh water, they are also often found in sheltered bays and estuaries along the coast.	The Mallard is the most widespread and common duck in Washington and can be found on virtually any lowland wetland throughout the state year round, as long as there is open water.	Mallards forage by up-ending in shallow water and by grazing on land. Mallard pairs form in the fall and winter, and remain intact through the winter and into spring. Pair bonds tend to break up, however, when the female begins incubating eggs.	Mallards are omnivorous, eating seeds, stems, and roots from a variety of aquatic plants, especially sedges, grasses, pondweeds, and smartweeds. Insect larvae and other aquatic invertebrates are also part of the diet, especially the diet of young birds. In many places, humans provide Mallards with food year round.	In western counties, widespread and common in vicinity of virtually any low-elevation water source, preferring fresh water. In Kittitas County, common along Columbia River and in open landscapes at middle elevations below lower tree line, principally in Kittitas Valley and near Yakima River. Has adapted to presence of humans, probably increasing since settlement; now breeds routinely in residential and agricultural settings. Records much more scattered in less populated landscapes at higher elevations on both sides of Cascades.	The female usually picks a nest site that is close to water, but may be over a mile away. Typically situated on the ground under dense vegetation, the nest is sometimes on a stump, platform, or even up to 10 feet off the ground in a tree. It is usually a shallow bowl of plant matter, lined with down. The female typically lays 7 to 10 eggs, which she incubates for 26 to 30 days. Within a day of hatching, the young leave the nest. The female leads the young to the water and continues to tend them, and they feed themselves. The young first fly at 52 to 60 days.	Mallards will remain as far north in winter as conditions permit, and many populations that are fed by people do not migrate. Those that do migrate do so early in spring. Most birds are heading from wintering grounds to breeding areas in February and March. The fall migration is more drawn out. Males leave their mates when incubation begins (as early as mid-March) and gather in large wetlands where they molt into their non-breeding or eclipse plumage and go through a flightless period. The actual migration movement begins in late August and lasts through December, with peak movements in October and November.	mallard	MALL			
32	6	Anas	querquedula	Garganey	Accidental visitor. Washington Bird Records Committee review list species.	LC		The Garganey, an Old World dabbling duck, is closely related to the Northern Shoveler and the Blue-winged and Cinnamon Teals. Like these, it is found primarily in freshwater wetlands and shallow ponds, where it feeds by filtering small particles from water passed through its bill rather than by tipping up. The male in breeding plumage is unmistakable, with gray flanks and a bold, white eyebrow crossing to the back of the brown head and curving down toward the neck. Females, juveniles, and non-breeding-plumaged males are difficult to separate from Blue-winged and Cinnamon Teals but have a stronger facial pattern than these.

The Garganey breeds across Eurasia from the sub-Arctic to the temperate zone and winters in the northern tropics of Africa and Asia. It is a regular migrant in the outer Aleutians and a rare but widespread vagrant across North America. The first accepted Washington record was from the Chehalis River floodplain near Satsop (Grays Harbor County) in April&#8211;May 1991. The only other accepted state record was from the Columbia Basin, at Richland (Benton County) in December 1994. An older record of a bird collected near Mount Vernon (Skagit County) in April 1961 has not been reviewed by the Washington Bird Records Committee. Oregon and Idaho each have two or three records while British Columbia has several, including five from the Greater Vancouver vicinity.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								garganey				
33	6	Anas	rubripes	American Black Duck	Accidental visitor. Washington Bird Records Committee review list species.	LC	A small, feral population was present in Washington from the late 1960s through the mid-1990s. This population appears to have been extirpated in recent years due to competition and hybridization with Mallards, a factor that also contributes to their decline in their traditional range. Since American Black Ducks are not native to Washington, this decline is not of major conservation concern in our state.	The American Black Duck is a large duck that closely resembles a female Mallard. The Black Duck's body color is darker than that of a Mallard, and the head color is slightly lighter. In flight, the Black Duck can be distinguished by the solid purplish-blue patch on its wing (lacking the white edges found on the Mallard) and the contrast between the dark body and upperwings and the light underwing linings. Black Ducks are unusual among dabbling ducks in that males and females are almost identical, distinguishable in the breeding season only by the bright yellow bill of the male.		1	American Black Ducks are historically found in forested wetlands, tidewater areas, and coastal marshes of eastern North America.	A few remnant birds may still be present near the Everett sewage ponds (Snohomish County), where the feral population once was. Vagrants also turn up occasionally in various locations. It is usually difficult to determine whether these birds are escapees from captive populations or true vagrants, wandering from their traditional range.	Black Ducks congregate in large groups in the fall and winter, when pair bonds form. Pairs remain together through the winter and into the breeding season. Once the eggs are laid and the female begins incubation, the pair dissolves. At this time the males molt their feathers and go through a month-long period of flightlessness while their new feathers grow in. Once the young fledge, the females go through the same flightless molt. By August, both sexes are able to fly again.	Black Ducks dabble for food, tipping their bodies up and dunking their heads to forage under water. They occasionally forage on land. When in coastal marshes, they are more omnivorous than most dabbling ducks, with mollusks, crustaceans, and arthropods making up nearly half of their diet. The other half is seeds, tubers, and other vegetable matter more typical of the group		American Black Ducks nest on or near the ground, generally close to water. Dense clumps of vegetation help to obscure shallow depressions lined with plant material and feather down. The female incubates 9 to 10 eggs, rarely leaving the nest during the final few days before hatching. Immediately after hatching, chicks can swim and find food on their own.	Black Ducks winter farther north and migrate later than most dabbling ducks. Throughout their range, they migrate varying distances, although the small population formerly in Washington was resident year round.	american_black_duck	ABDU			
34	6	Anas	strepera	Gadwall	Common resident.	LC	The Gadwall was traditionally a duck of the Midwestern prairies and was an uncommon sight in Washington. The conversion of the coniferous landscape to a more open one has helped create habitats more inviting to Gadwalls, as has the spread of Eurasian Water Milfoil into urban lakes. The first Gadwall nests in Washington were reported in the mid-1960s. Range-wide, the Gadwall population fluctuates greatly, but it continues to expand its range and does not appear to be in decline overall.	Gadwalls are medium-sized, streamlined ducks with mottled brown-and-black body plumage and light brown heads. Females and males in eclipse plumage may look superficially similar to Mallards. Both sexes have a black and white wing-patch, or speculum, that is distinctive in flight. Males also have chestnut on the forewing. Males in breeding plumage have gray and black striations on their bodies and heads, and black rumps. Females, immatures, and eclipse-plumaged males have thin, black bills with orange on the sides, while males in breeding plumage have solid black bills.		1	Ponds and marshes are the preferred habitat of the Gadwall, which is often found in deeper water than many other dabblers. In western Washington, it is associated with developed and cleared areas and, on Puget Sound, shows a preference for urbanized habitats over less developed areas. Gadwalls are often found at sewage ponds.	Gadwalls are common breeders in the Columbia Basin of eastern Washington. They also breed in western Washington along the Columbia River and on the east shore of Puget Sound from Mount Vernon to Olympia. They are common in winter in wetland habitats in these areas, as well as along the coast.	Gadwalls forage mainly while swimming, either taking items from the surface or dabbling in shallow water, or diving, which they are more likely to do than most other dabblers. They often follow American Coots, foraging on plants that have been brought up to the surface. Gadwalls seldom forage on land. They are more strongly monogamous than other ducks, with over 90% paired by November, 4 to 5 months prior to the breeding season. This monogamy is limited, however, and as with other ducks, the pair bonds dissolve upon the start of incubation, and males leave the breeding area to gather in bachelor flocks.	The preferred diet of the Gadwall is the invasive, exotic submergent, Eurasian Water Milfoil. Gadwalls, especially when they are young, also eat aquatic invertebrates and the occasional small fish.	Western Washington populations of this primarily Midwestern species have increased dramatically in historic times concurrent with removal of original coniferous forests (Smith et al. 1997). Now common in freshwater habitats at low elevations throughout urban and suburban King County, where seems to favor water bodies invaded by Eurasian watermilfoil, a preferred food plant. Also well represented in Island County, but rare in Kitsap County with no confirmed BBA records. Only Kittitas County records along Columbia River: pair at West Bar on 23 or 24 May 1997, another at Sentinel Gap on 29 June 1997.	A late nester, the female Gadwall picks the nest site, which is usually near water and surrounded by dense weeds or grass. The nest itself is on the ground, made of grasses and weeds and lined with down. The female lays 8 to 10 eggs, which she incubates for 24 to 27 days. Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest and can swim and find their own food. The female remains with the young until they fledge at about ten weeks of age.	Gadwalls are short-distance migrants, most wintering north of the tropics. Many do not migrate at all, and they can be found year round in both western and eastern Washington. Most pairs arrive on the breeding grounds in early April. Fall migration lasts from late August to October and peaks in September.	gadwall	GADW			
35	6	Anser	albifrons	Greater White-fronted Goose	Fairly common migrant. Uncommon winter.	LC	The population of Greater White-fronted Geese has fluctuated. Pacific birds declined in the 1970s and 1980s, but increasing numbers have been wintering in western Washington in recent years. Hunting is a major factor controlling populations (but losses due to hunting can be managed). Habitat loss is a more difficult challenge. Large oil fields on the Alaskan Arctic coastal plain have degraded the wetlands in that area, potentially affecting nesting success of the Greater White-fronted Goose. The Tule Goose, a large, dark subspecies that nests in southern Alaska and winters in central California, makes up about 1% of the total population, but its status in the Pacific Northwest is poorly known.	The Greater White-fronted Goose is mottled brownish-gray overall with a black tail, white rump, white band at the tip of the tail, and bright orange legs. The belly has a varied pattern of large black splotches. Its name is derived from the white facial feathers around the base of the pinkish-yellow bill. The juvenile looks similar but lacks the white facial feathering and black markings on the belly.		1	Greater White-fronted Geese nest on marshy ponds in the tundra or taiga. They winter in open country in mild climates in habitat with shallow fresh or salt water near agricultural fields.	Among the first fall migrants seen along Washington's outer coastline, Greater White-fronted Geese are common from late August to mid October and again from mid-April to mid-May on the coast. They are often seen in small, mixed-species flocks. They are also regularly seen during migration in freshwater habitats in eastern Washington as well, occurrence there somewhat later both spring and fall. The best time to see these geese is in early May. Leadbetter Point, Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge (Clark County), and Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County) are good spots to observe this species.	The Greater White-fronted Goose grazes while walking on land, and dabbles when in the water. Social most of the year, this goose is territorial during the breeding season.	In the winter, seeds and waste grain are the staple of the diet. Stems and roots become more important sources of food during the breeding season. These geese also eat some invertebrates.		The Greater White-fronted Goose doesn't usually breed until 3 years of age. The female builds a shallow depression lined with plant material and down in a sheltered spot near the water. She lays and incubates 3 to 6 eggs for 22 to 27 days. The young walk and swim almost immediately after hatching, and both parents tend them, although they feed themselves. First flight is typically between 38 and 45 days, but the young remain with the parents for at least the first year, and often maintain an association with the family for several years.	A long-distance migrant, the Greater White-fronted Goose relies on established migratory routes and stopover points on its way to wintering grounds in California and southern Oregon.	greater_white-fronted_goose	GWFG			
36	6	Anser	fabalis	Taiga Bean-Goose	Accidental visitor. Washington Bird Records Committee review list species.	LC		This large goose is rather similar to the Greater White-fronted Goose but has a larger, dark bill with an orange band, no white frontal patch, and a uniformly lighter-gray belly. The Taiga Bean-Goose breeds right across Eurasia from Norway to Siberia, and winters south to southern Europe and China, favoring open grassland and farmland. It is a rare but regular visitor to the Aleutians and the Bering Sea region of Alaska during its northward migration in spring but has been seen only extremely rarely elsewhere in North America. The Pacific Northwest has two records, both from Grays Harbor County, Washington: a bird that made a brief appearance at Bowerman Basin on 26 April 1993, and another that stayed for nearly two weeks in December 2002 in Hoquiam, where it was seen closely by many observers, and photographed. This second bird was identified as belonging to the subspecies <i>A.f. middendorffii</i> that breeds in eastern Asia.
Another similar, closely related goose, the Pink-footed Goose <i>(Anser brachyrhyncus)</i>, has been recorded in Washington. In November 2003 two Pink-footed Geese visited the same location in Hoquiam that hosted the Bean Goose the year before. The Pink-footed Goose breeds along the east coast of Greenland, on Iceland, and on Svalbard, winters in Great Britain and other countries around the North Sea, and is a rare vagrant to Atlantic Canada and the northeastern United States. However, its appearance in the West was unprecedented, causing the Washington Bird Records Committee to reject the record as possibly representing escaped birds from a waterfowl collection. Pink-footed Goose is somewhat lighter brown than Taiga Bean-Goose and slightly smaller, with pink rather than orange legs and a smaller bill with a pink band. <i>Revised June 2007</i>		1								taiga_bean-goose				
37	35	Anthus	cervinus	Red-throated Pipit		LC		One record, from San Juan Island (San Juan County) in September 1979.		1								red-throated_pipit				
38	35	Anthus	rubescens	American Pipit	Common migrant. Uncommon winter west, fairly common breeder.	LC	While there is some suggestion of declining numbers, American Pipits are currently widespread and common.  Global warming may allow these birds to winter farther north than previously, but it also may reduce and fragment existing breeding areas.  Forest clearing has probably increased American Pipit migration and wintering habitat, but the draining and destruction of wetlands and livestock grazing have had negative impacts on these habitats.	American Pipits are small, brownish, streaked birds that are sparrow-like in appearance, but with much thinner bills.  Males and females look alike.  They are slender, with gray-brown backs and buff-colored breasts.  During the breeding season, their breasts may be streaked or unstreaked, but outside the breeding season, they are typically more heavily streaked.		1	American Pipits are open-country birds in all seasons.  They breed in alpine areas, near seeps, streams, lakes, or wet meadows.  During migration and winter, they come down into the lowlands and can be found on beaches, marshes, agricultural fields, short-grass prairies, and mudflats.	American Pipits are present in Washington as breeders, migrants, and wintering birds.  They are common breeders at high elevations in the Olympics and North Cascades, and at major volcanic mountains in the southern Cascades.  In the Olympics, they are most common in the wetter, western alpine areas.  They are common from Mount Baker to Harts Pass (Whatcom County), and on Mount Adams, Mount Rainier, and Mount St. Helens.  They are common migrants in open habitats throughout the state from mid-April to early May, and then again from early September to mid-November.  Small numbers winter in western Washington, and can be found in fallow fields or open, disturbed areas, and on beaches. A few wintering birds can rarely be found in the river valleys and lake basins of eastern Washington.	American Pipits walk or run along the ground and forage in flocks outside the breeding season.  They wag their tails up and down and are easily identified by the double call-note given in flight.  When flushed, they fly up, circle around, and come back down to the ground, descending in a stair-step pattern.	During summer, American Pipits eat mostly invertebrates.  During fall and winter, American Pipits complement their diet with grass and weed seeds, which can make up half their diet during these seasons.	Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) maps predicted breeding range at very high elevations on both sides of Cascade crest north of Snoqualmie Pass and in western Wenatchee Mountains. Most records during BBA period came from this area, but one possible record from Huckleberry Mountain (elevation 4,600 feet) in southeastern King County hints at wider distribution. American Pipits prefer moist habitats with well-developed alpine vegetation. Remoteness and difficulty of terrain precluded extensive atlas work in alpine zone along much of crest.	American Pipits are monogamous, and pairs may form during migration or on the wintering grounds.  They nest on the ground, usually in a sheltered spot, tucked under overhanging grass, a rock ledge, or other object.  The female builds a cup-nest out of grass, sedge, and weeds, and lines it with finer grass, feathers, or hair.  She incubates 3-7 eggs for about 14 days while the male brings her food.  The female broods the young for the first 4-5 days, and the male continues to bring food for the female and the chicks.  After brooding, the female joins in feeding the chicks.  The young leave the nest after about two weeks, but stay close and are fed by both adults for another two weeks, after which they join loose flocks of other immature birds.	American Pipits are highly migratory and travel during the day in loose, straggling flocks.  Fall migration begins in mid-September through October, when weather begins to deteriorate on the Arctic breeding grounds.  American Pipits winter throughout the southern United States south to the tip of Central America.  Birds return to the Arctic in the spring, with the peak migration occurring from late March through early May.	american_pipit	AMPI			
39	18	Aphelocoma	californica	California Scrub-Jay	Fairly common resident west.	LC	Western Scrub-Jays have been expanding their range northward and eastward since the 1970s.  This expansion is most likely due to increased residential development and feeding by humans, and will probably continue.  In Washington, the breeding population has expanded from the Portland, OR and Vancouver, WA area, up and down the Columbia River, and northward to King County, with wandering birds found north to Skagit and Snohomish Counties.	Western Scrub-Jays are medium-sized, slender birds with long tails.  The Western Scrub-Jay has blue upperparts, a grayish-brown back, and light underparts.  It has a well-defined blue breast-band that contrasts with its white breast and throat.  A white line just above each eye divides the blue crown from the darker cheek patches.		1	Western Scrub-Jays are typically found in oak woodlands.  In Washington, they are also found in residential areas with low- to mid-density development.	Western Scrub-Jays can be found regularly year round in western Washington lowlands from Puget Sound south.  They are occasional as far north as Seattle and have been found breeding north of Enumclaw and in Seattle in small numbers (King County).  They can be found rarely all the way to the coast in Grays Harbor County and east to Lyle in Klickitat County.  Ridgefield Wildlife Refuge in southwest Washington is a good location for finding them.	Western Scrub-Jays usually forage in pairs, family groups, or very small flocks outside the breeding season.  They forage on the ground and in trees, caching much of the food they find and retrieving it later.	Western Scrub-Jays are omnivorous, with a diet that varies by season and region.  In summer, they eat many insects, spiders, and snails, and in winter, they shift to berries, acorns, and other seeds.  They eat rodents, reptiles, amphibians, and the eggs and young of other bird species. They also visit bird feeders.	Recent colonist in low-elevation King and Kitsap Counties where now locally uncommon and increasing. Breeding confirmed so far only in King County, beginning with nest in Enumclaw in 1994, followed in 1999 by pair attending fledgling near Washington Park Arboretum in Seattle. At least four other nesting pairs in city since close of atlas period. All nesting records to date have come from relatively open residential neighborhoods.	Western Scrub-Jays are typically monogamous, and nest in shrubs or low trees.  Both members of the pair help build the nest, which is a thick-walled cup made of grass, twigs, and moss, lined with soft rootlets and hair.  The male brings food while the female incubates 3-6 eggs for 15-17 days.  Both adults help feed the young, which leave the nest at 18-19 days.  They typically raise one brood each year.	Western Scrub-Jays do not migrate, but some birds disperse, particularly in fall, which has enabled the species to spread north into Washington.	western_scrub-jay	CASJ			
40	57	Aphriza	virgata	Surfbird	Fairly common migrant and winter coast.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the Surfbird population at 70,000 birds.  They are listed as a species of special concern on the Partners in Flight watch list due to their limited breeding distribution, their vulnerability to oil pollution, and expanding development in their coastal wintering range.	The Surfbird is a plump shorebird with a short, plover-like bill, gray above and orange below. Its gray wings show prominent, white wing-stripes in flight. The tail has a white base with a black subterminal band. In breeding plumage, the Surfbird has salmon-colored patches on its wings. These fade considerably during the breeding season, and may be peach or almost white by the time the birds return to Washington in the fall.  Birds in breeding plumage are covered with a wash of dark spots, giving them an overall speckled appearance.  The juvenile is gray with white-edged feathers and a breast flecked with white.  The adult in non-breeding plumage is also gray, but lacks the white-edged feathers and has no streaks on its breast.		1	Surfbirds spend their entire lives in rocky areas. They breed in the rocky mountain tundra of Alaska and the Yukon, and migrate to rocky coastal shores. In winter, they are almost always within a few meters of the tidal line. They sometimes forage in non-rocky areas, but this is unusual.	Surfbirds may be present on Washington's outer coast in all months, although they are least common in June. The earliest returning migrants may arrive at the end of June, but most start to arrive in July. They are common from July to April, when they start migrating north for the breeding season.  By the end of May into early June, they are rare in Washington.  The northward migration peaks from mid-April to early May, and the fall migration peaks in August. Juveniles usually arrive about a month later than adults.  They are uncommon in the protected waters of Puget Sound, but can often be seen at Penn Cove on Whidbey Island (Island County) and Duwamish Head in West Seattle (King County). There are typically many Surfbirds on the jetty at Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County), which is one of the few places where Surfbirds are generally more common than Black Turnstones.	Surfbirds occur in small flocks, usually with fewer than 25 birds, and are almost always seen in Washington with Black Turnstones.  They are also seen with Rock Sandpipers, Wandering Tattlers, and occasionally Ruddy Turnstones. The Surfbird's bill is well adapted to prying food off rocks.	The summer diet consists of insects, spiders, and other invertebrates. Surfbirds also eat seeds.  In coastal areas, they eat mussels, barnacles, and limpets. The Surfbird eats these creatures shells and all, unlike the Black Turnstone which pulls the creature from its shell.		There are many unknowns in the nesting biology of the Surfbird. Its nesting habitat is on remote, rocky ridges above the timberline.  In areas with grazing sheep and caribou, Surfbirds remain on the nest until the last moment, and then fly up in the intruding animal's face, a defense mechanism used on humans as well.  Pairs form on the breeding grounds.  The nest is located on the ground in a natural depression, usually completely exposed.  Both parents help line the nest with lichen, leaves, and moss. Males are known to incubate, but female incubation has not been confirmed. Incubation lasts for 22-24 days.  The young leave the nest within a day or so of hatching and feed themselves. It is not clear whether both adults, or only the male, tend the young. Fledging age is not known.	The winter range of the Surfbird is one of the longest and narrowest of any North American breeding bird, stretching from southern Alaska to southern Chile.  In spring, most of the population gathers in Prince William Sound before heading to breeding sites.	surfbird	SURF			
41	1	Aquila	chrysaetos	Golden Eagle	Fairly common resident, mostly east.	LC	The Golden Eagle has declined across North America due to harassment by humans and habitat destruction, mainly shrub-steppe decline and degradation. Cheat grass invasion and the conversion of wild land to agricultural use have reduced their prey base considerably, especially the jackrabbit, a major source of food for this species. Historically, Golden Eagles have been perceived as threats to range animals, and were frequently killed by ranchers. Current populations are considered stable range-wide. In Washington, the Golden Eagle is a candidate for the state endangered species list. Christmas Bird Count data suggest that these eagles are declining in the Northwest, although the causes are unknown.	Golden Eagles are solid brown as adults, with golden highlights on their heads, the leading edges of their wings, and their legs. The juvenile has a white patch on each wing and white at the base of its tail. Both the juvenile and the adult have golden plumage at the napes of their necks. Golden Eagles are similar in size to Bald Eagles, but with smaller heads and bills. They have feathers down their legs to their toes.		1	During the nesting season, Golden Eagles require open areas with large, rocky cliffs or large trees, such as Ponderosa pines. They are often found in alpine parkland and mid-elevation clear-cuts, as well as in shrub-steppe areas and open forests.	Golden Eagles can be seen more or less year round in Washington. They are permanent residents in many areas of eastern Washington where they are common in appropriate habitat along the eastern Cascades. They are uncommon in the northeastern portion of the state and in southeastern Washington along the Snake and Grande Ronde Rivers. Yakima Canyon and the Yakima Training Center support high densities of prey and a few Golden Eagles. During February and March, northbound migrants concentrate along Rattlesnake Ridge (Yakima County). In western Washington, although rare in the winter, the Golden Eagle can be found in the dry rain-shadow to the east of the Olympic Mountains, (San Juan and Orcas Islands in San Juan County) and the large volcanoes. They are very rare in the remainder of western Washington.	Golden Eagles typically soar at high altitudes; they may also be seen perched on poles or cliff edges. They drop down on prey and capture it in their talons. Pairs will sometimes hunt together. They make dramatic, acrobatic display flights to solidify the pair bond and to defend their territories. Golden Eagles require large territories.	Golden Eagles eat mostly mid-sized mammals, especially marmots, rabbits, and ground squirrels. They also prey on birds, including the Rock Doves that inhabit their nesting area. Although they scavenge less often than Bald Eagles, they will eat carrion of deer and elk, especially in winter. In early spring, they often consume the afterbirth of cows and sheep.	Records generalized to full township/ranges; true population density thus much thinner than symbolized. Uncommon and local in open forest and mountains, and near precipitous cliffs above shrub-steppe. Scattered records from King County, with higher densities in Kittitas County. Bulky nests located on cliffs or in large trees. Favored prey items include rabbits and marmots, although cliff-nesting pairs also take Rock Pigeons. Declining prey base of jackrabbits and ground squirrels appears to be limiting factor for population size in steppe habitats (J. Watson, pers. comm.).	Golden Eagles are monogamous, and long-term pair bonds are typical. A pair may reuse its nest, adding more material each year. Both sexes help build the nest on a cliff ledge or in a large tree. Pairs may have two or more nest sites and alternate between sites from year to year. The nest is a bulky platform of sticks, lined with weeds, moss, and other fine material. Both members of the pair incubate the two eggs for 41 to 45 days.  The female spends the first few weeks brooding the young, while the male brings food. Later, both adults bring food. The young fledge at 60 to 70 days.	Northern birds are migratory, but throughout the western US and southwest Canada, only the juveniles may migrate south while the adults remain permanent residents.  During periods of heavy snow, many of Washington's Golden Eagles move down into valleys or out of Washington altogether, but return in early spring. Southbound movements also occur along the Cascade Crest in September, through habitats with plentiful marmots, or along the high ridges of the shrub-steppe zone, where black-tailed jackrabbits and ground squirrels are common.	golden_eagle	GOEA			
42	52	Aratinga	canicularis	Orange-fronted Parakeet		LC				0								orange-fronted_parakeet				
43	65	Archilochus	alexandri	Black-chinned Hummingbird	Uncommon summer resident east.	LC	Suburban areas with tall trees, exotic flowering shrubs and vines, and hummingbird feeders have all supplied beneficial habitat for Black-chins. Population levels in urban and suburban areas have increased, although protection of river corridors is important for their continued success.	Compared to other Washington hummingbirds, the Black-chinned Hummingbird has a smaller head, thinner neck, and more slender body. The body of both male and female adults is green with white underparts.  The adult male has a black chin underlined with a wide purple band.  Often the entire head looks black.	Black-chinned hummingbirds produce a variety of call notes, typically used while chasing other birds. Their rapid wingbeats also produce a buzzing sound.	1	In Washington, they are found in the steppe and Ponderosa pine zones.  Within these vegetation zones, they are found in wetland areas, along rivers, and in towns.  Males are often found in drier areas than nearby females.	The least common of Washington's breeding hummingbirds, Black-chinned Hummingbirds can be found east of the Cascades at low elevations in wetlands, urban and suburban areas, and along rivers. They are common in northeastern Washington and along the Idaho border, south to the Blue Mountains. Areas of highest density are around the city of Spokane and the Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge in Spokane County.	The courtship dive of the male is a long, pendulum-like swoop above a perched female.  At the bottom of the dive, he produces a long-drawn-out vocalization.  Sometimes the dive takes the shape of a narrow, horizontal figure eight.  During this dive, the wing and tail feathers make a loud whistling sound. Black-chinned Hummingbirds produce a variety of call notes, typically used while chasing other birds.  Their rapid wing-beats also produce a buzzing sound.	Black-chinned Hummingbirds feed on small insects, spiders, nectar from a wide variety of flowers, and sugar-water from feeders.  They feed at varying levels, from close to the ground to high up in trees.  They catch insects in the air, glean them from vegetation, or take them from spider webs or from the ground.	Rare and local in Kittitas County in ponderosa pine/shrub-steppe ecotone. Five BBA records along Yakima River and tributaries from Ellensburg west to Elk Heights; two records in Quilomene Wildlife Area, slightly outside predicted range in Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Often associated with shrubby vegetation near streams and springs.	All parental care is by females, who have been observed feeding young in one nest while incubating eggs in another.  As is typical with hummingbirds, Black-chinned Hummingbirds lay two eggs.  Nests are usually built 3-10 feet off the ground in a fork or branch of a deciduous tree, often over a small creek bed.  Nests are composed of plant down held together with spider webbing, and adorned on the outside with lichen, bud scales, bark, and other small items.  The female incubates the eggs for 13-16 days.  She feeds and cares for the young by herself until they become independent at 20-21 days.	Most Black-chinned Hummingbirds winter in Mexico, although some spend the winter in southern Texas. Males arrive in Washington in late May, and females arrive 1-2 weeks later. The males start to leave the breeding ground in mid- to late June, and most are gone by the end of July. The females and young remain longer, but start to head south in July, and most have left by the middle of August.	black-chinned_hummingbird				
44	65	Archilochus	colubris	Ruby-throated Hummingbird		LC		One record, on east slope of Cascades in June.		1								ruby-throated_hummingbird				
45	8	Ardea	alba	Great Egret	Fairly common summer east. Uncommon migrant and winter west.	LC	Great Egrets were nearly wiped out in the United States in the late 1800s when their plumes were fashionable on women's hats.  The enactment of the International Migratory Bird Treaty in 1914 put a stop to the slaughter of these and many other species in peril.  The Great Egret has made a rapid recovery, and the breeding range has been expanding gradually northward.  The first record of Great Egrets nesting in Washington was in 1979 at Potholes Reservoir in Grant County. Since then, they have expanded their nesting in Washington, and their expansion into southwestern Washington continues rapidly.	A large, long-necked and long-legged wading bird with pure white plumage, the Great Egret has a long, yellow bill, and dark legs and feet. In breeding plumage, adults have longish plumes descending from their tails, but not their heads.		1	Great Egrets inhabit freshwater wetlands, usually foraging in open areas of lakes, large marshes, and along large rivers.	Great Egrets are mainly found in wetlands in the central arid steppe of eastern Washington.  Nesting occurs at the north and south ends of Potholes Reservoir (Grant County) and along the Columbia River between Benton and Franklin Counties.  Great Egrets are found in large numbers in this area in late summer.  In the winter, a few may be found at the mouth of the Columbia River, and small numbers are seen along the Washington coast.  They are generally not found in Puget Sound in the winter.  Numbers can remain high near Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge throughout the winter, and breeding has occurred at this site for the last two years.	Great Egrets can be found feeding in flocks of their own kind or with other herons.  When feeding, they stand or walk slowly in shallow water waiting for prey to come by, and then they thrust to catch it with their bills.  Sometimes they forage in open fields, occasionally around cattle, but are not likely to be confused with the much smaller Cattle Egret.	Fish is their primary food, but Great Egrets also eat crustaceans, frogs, other aquatic creatures, and rodents and grasshoppers from terrestrial feeding areas.		Great Egrets usually nest near water, in trees, shrubs, or thickets.  They probably first breed at 2-3 years of age.  Although isolated pairs are sometimes seen, colonies--often multi-species--are the norm.  In multi-species colonies, the Great Egrets tend to nest higher than other species.  The male selects the nest area where he displays to attract the female.  Both sexes build the stick nest, and both help incubate the 3-4 eggs for 23-26 days.  Both parents feed the young by regurgitation.  At the age of three weeks, the young may begin to climb about the nest, but do not fledge until 6-7 weeks.	Birds breeding in northern areas where water freezes migrate in the winter.  In milder climates, the birds remain through the winter.  Wanderers are not uncommon in northern areas after the breeding season.	great_egret				
46	8	Ardea	herodias	Great Blue Heron	Common resident.	LC	This highly adaptable species thrives in a wide variety of habitats over a broad range.  Although Great Blue Herons are common and widespread, disturbance during a breeding season may lead to nest failure or colony abandonment.  In April of 1999, 40% of the Seattle-area heron colonies were abandoned mid-season.  This may have been caused by human disturbance or, as has recently observed in the Seattle area, by avaian predators.  Bald Eagles, becoming increasingly more common with increasingly less foraging habitat, have taken to harassing Great Blue Herons on their colonies and feeding on the chicks.  Adding to the impact, crows now wait on the sidelines and swoop in to take the remaining eggs once the eagles finish their meals. Another form of disturbance that is detrimental to herons on nesting colonies is noise. Clear-cutting and construction near a colony are particularly damaging, and a 1000-foot buffer zone around colonies is recommended. One change that has been noticed in Washington in recent years is that colonies that once numbered 100-200 nests are breaking up into smaller groups with 30-40 nests each.	The familiar Great Blue Heron is the largest heron in North America.  It is a large bird, with a slate-gray body, chestnut and black accents, and very long legs and neck.  In flight, it looks enormous, with a six-foot wingspan.  Adults sport a shaggy ruff at the base of their necks.  A black eyebrow extends back to black plumes emerging from the head.  Juveniles have a dark crown with no plumes or ruff, and a mottled neck.  In flight, a Great Blue Heron typically holds its head in toward its body with its neck bent.		1	Adaptable and widespread, the Great Blue Heron is found in a wide variety of habitats.  When feeding, it is usually seen in slow-moving or calm salt, fresh, or brackish water. Great Blue Herons inhabit sheltered, shallow bays and inlets, sloughs, marshes, wet meadows, shores of lakes, and rivers.  Nesting colonies are typically found in mature forests, on islands, or near mudflats, and do best when they are free of human disturbance and have foraging areas close by.	Foraging Great Blue Herons are not hard to find in appropriate habitat throughout the year. Some prominent rookeries can be found on Samish Island between Samish Bay and Padilla Bay (Skagit County); at the Dumas Bay Sanctuary in Tacoma (Pierce County); by the Ballard Locks in Seattle, at Lake Sammamish State Park (both in King County); on Vancouver Lake (Clark County); and at Potholes WRA (Grant County). When observing Great Blue Heron rookeries, please keep in mind the 1000-foot disturbance buffer zone.	Great Blue Herons are often seen flying high overhead with slow wing-beats.  When foraging, they stand silently along riverbanks, lake shores, or in wet meadows, waiting for prey to come by, which they then strike with their bills.  They will also stalk prey slowly and deliberately.  Although they hunt predominantly by day, they may also be active at night.  They are solitary or small-group foragers, but they nest in colonies.  Males typically choose shoreline areas for foraging, and females and juveniles forage in more upland areas.	The variable diet of Great Blue Herons allows them to exploit a variety of habitats.  This adaptability also enables them to winter farther north than most herons.  Fish, amphibians, reptiles, invertebrates, small mammals, and even other birds are all potential prey of the Great Blue Heron.  In Washington, much of their winter hunting is on land, with voles making up a major portion of their winter diet.	Common and widespread about marshes, mud flats, and agricultural lands in Puget Trough lowlands; much more local, but still common, in similar open habitats at low and moderate elevations in Kittitas County, primarily along Yakima and Columbia Rivers. Nests colonially in trees near water and disperses to feeding areas. Smaller numbers found up to middle elevations along river valleys and lakes; however, these birds may not be breeding.	Great Blue Herons usually breed in colonies containing a few to several hundred pairs. Isolated pair-breeding is rare.  Nest building begins in February when a male chooses a nesting territory and displays to attract a female.  The nest is usually situated high up in a tree.  The male gathers sticks for the female who fashions them into a platform nest lined with small twigs, bark strips, and conifer needles.  Both parents incubate the 3-5 eggs for 25-29 days.  Both parents regurgitate food for the young.  The young can first fly at about 60 days old, although they continue to return to the nest and are fed by the adults for another few weeks.  Pair bonds only last for the nesting season, and adults form new bonds each year.	In parts of their range where food is not available in the winter, Great Blue Herons are migratory, and some may migrate to Washington from points farther north.  Most of Washington's breeding population remains in the state year round.  In parts of eastern Washington where the water freezes, Great Blue Heron populations concentrate along major rivers where food is available, or they hunt rodents on land.	great_blue_heron	GBHE			
47	57	Arenaria	interpres	Ruddy Turnstone	Fairly common migrant. Uncommon winter west.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the worldwide population of Ruddy Turnstones to number 449,000, with 235,000 breeding in North America and the rest throughout the Arctic.  They are common and widespread. Their remote breeding range and widespread winter range should help them remain a common species.	The Ruddy Turnstone is a compact shorebird with distinctive plumages and bright orange legs.  It has a short, wedge-shaped bill that it uses in its unique foraging style.  The male in breeding plumage has a rufous back, striped with black and white.  The belly is white, and the head is boldly patterned in black and white.  A bold, black 'U' in front of the wing is a prominent feature on the male in breeding plumage, and is visible, although less so, in all other plumages.  In flight, the Ruddy Turnstone shows white at the base of the tail, on the wings, and on the back. Females and males in non-breeding plumage are duller than breeding males, their backs mottled gray-brown rather than rufous.		1	Ruddy Turnstones breed in the Arctic tundra. During migration and winter, they inhabit coastal areas with sandy or rocky shores, although they are most typically found on mudflats, especially those with rocks.  In migration, they can be found inland in plowed fields.	While a few Ruddy Turnstones sometimes winter at Coupeville on Whidbey Island (Island County) and in Willapa Bay (Pacific County), they are predominantly migrants in Washington.  They are most common in spring, from late April through May, when they are common on the outer coast and uncommon on the protected shores of Puget Sound and the Strait of Juan de Fuca.  Migrants are less common in fall than in spring, but they are still fairly common. Adults come through from mid-July to early August, and juveniles follow from late August to late September.	Ruddy Turnstones flock in small groups, larger in spring than fall, and often occur with Dunlins and Red Knots in the spring.  Active foragers, turnstones are best known for their habit of turning over objects and eating the food underneath.  They are quite strong and have been known to turn over rocks as big as their own heads. They also flip over seaweed, small sticks, and other objects in their search for food.  When moving from place to place locally, Ruddy Turnstone flocks fly in tight groups. During migration, they fly in loose lines.	Ruddy Turnstones are generalists. They eat anything they can find under rocks and seaweed, as well as carrion and often the eggs of small, colonial terns.		Nests are located on the open ground in wet tundra areas or dry rocky ridges.  They are sometimes well concealed among rocks or under shrubs.  The female builds the nest, a shallow depression with a sparse lining of leaves.  Both parents incubate the four eggs for 22 to 24 days.  The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and follow the male to food. They feed themselves, but both parents help protect and tend the young. The female usually departs first, leaving the male to watch over the young until they can fly, typically at 19 to 21 days.	The Ruddy Turnstone is a bird of both the Old and New Worlds. Ruddy Turnstones travel from their Arctic nesting grounds to coastal wintering grounds from the southern United States to South America. Range-wide, they winter along the coastlines of every continent except Antarctica.	ruddy_turnstone				
48	57	Arenaria	melanocephala	Black Turnstone	Common migrant. Winter resident on coast.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population at 80,000 birds. Christmas Bird Count data suggest that there has been a decline in recent years. Black Turnstones are listed as a species of special concern on the Partners in Flight watch list.	The Black Turnstone is a compact, short-billed bird found on rocky shores.  All plumages are mostly black with white bellies. Their bellies and underwings are white, and their heads and breasts are black.  In flight, they show white on the back, wings, and base of the tail. In breeding plumage, the Black Turnstone has a white mustache and some white on the breast.  Its legs are orange-brown and can be quite bright, although not as bright as those of the Ruddy Turnstone.  Males and females appear similar, but males are brighter with more contrast in color on the head. Their long, black wing coverts contrast with their white sides.		1	A coastal species at all times of the year, Black Turnstones nest in the wet tundra of coastal Alaska, often near estuaries or lagoons.  They migrate and winter along the rocky shorelines of the Pacific Coast. They are most often found foraging on rocky shores, jetties, and islets.  They also forage on top of kelp beds.	Black Turnstones are common throughout the winter on rocky shores along the outer coast of Washington and in Puget Sound south to Seattle.  They start leaving for the breeding grounds in mid-May and are rare in Washington by the first half of June.  A few birds return in late June, more arrive in July, and they are once again common by mid-July.  Juveniles follow in August.  There are a few scattered records inland, but the Black Turnstone is primarily a bird of the coast.  Penn Cove on Whidbey Island (Island County) is an excellent place to see them, as are Alki Beach in West Seattle (King County) and Drayton Harbor (Whatcom County).	Black Turnstones are usually found in small flocks, but they may number 100 or more.
The Black Turnstone moves steadily and slowly over rocks, looking for prey to pry off with its strong bill, thus its name.  On beaches it turns over rocks and shells in search of food, although not as often as the related Ruddy Turnstone.	Limpets and acorn barnacles are the most important food items on the wintering grounds of the Black Turnstone. During the breeding season, they eat many insects as well as some berries and seeds.		Black Turnstones return to the same nest and pair with the same mate year after year.  They nest on the ground, among sedges or grasses close to water. The nest is sometimes out in the open, sometimes hidden by tall vegetation.  Both parents help make the shallow scrape lined with grass.  Both help incubate the four eggs for 22-24 days. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and find their own food. Both parents tend the young, but the female leaves about two weeks post-hatching, and the male cares for the young until they are independent. They begin to make short flights at 23 days, and have mastered sustained flight by 28-30 days.	Migrants follow the coastline closely in spring on their way back to coastal breeding grounds in Alaska. In the fall, some birds cut across the Gulf of Alaska to shorten their trip south. They winter from the southern coast of Alaska down the Pacific to Mexico.	black_turnstone	BLTU			
49	60	Asio	flammeus	Short-eared Owl	Uncommon summer east. Fairly common winter west.	LC	Fluctuations in the Short-eared Owl population, due most likely to cyclical variation in the population of voles, make it difficult to determine long-term trends.  However, declines have been recorded from many parts of the owls' range, and Short-eared Owls are listed as an at-risk species by Partners in Flight. Development and agriculture, which result in loss of habitat, are the most significant threats to the population in Washington.	Short-eared Owls are medium-sized owls with mottled brown and buff plumage.  Their facial disks are light, with dark patches at the eyes.  They have short ear-tufts that are usually held down, out of view.  They are light underneath, with finely streaked chests and bellies.  Males are paler than females.  Short-eared Owls have dark markings at the wrist on both the underside and upper side of the wings.  In flight they can be hard to tell from the closely related Long-eared Owls, except by behavior and habitat.		1	Short-eared Owls inhabit open terrain in all seasons.  They use shrub-steppe, grasslands, agricultural areas, marshes, wet meadows, and shorelines.   They are often seen perched on fence posts or pieces of driftwood.	Short-eared Owls formerly bred at many sites in western Washington, but there are few if any recent breeding records.  During winter, they are more abundant and easier to find. During winter and migration, they can be found primarily at coastal sites and in the Vancouver lowlands in Clark County.  In eastern Washington, they are uncommon breeders in appropriate habitat.  Short-eared Owls are sometimes irruptive, and numbers vary from year to year.	Because they are active during the day, Short-eared Owls are easier to see than most other owls.  They are especially active at dawn and dusk, and they perform dramatic courtship flights, complete with vocalizing and wing clapping, during the breeding season.  They are chase-predators and hunt by flying low over an open area, with their wings at a slight dihedral, somewhat like Northern Harriers.  Their buoyant wing-beats give them a distinctive moth-like appearance.	Short-eared Owls eat small mammals, especially voles.  They take other small rodents, shrews, rabbits, gophers, bats, and muskrats as well.  Occasionally, they prey on birds.	Limited to open habitats such as shrub-steppe, fields, farms, and open marshes, where nests on ground. Uncommon in Kittitas County, with cluster of records from irrigated farmlands near Ellensburg. Stepniewski (1999) noted presence of these owls into May on Yakima County portion of Yakima Training Center; lack of BBA records from Kittitas County portion of this controlled-access facility perhaps due to inadequate observer effort. Small number of records from open habitats in southwestern King County, from first atlas phase, probably represent late migrants. Short-eared Owl in serious decline as breeder statewide, currently nearing extirpation in western Washington.	While Short-eared Owls are typically monogamous, they form loose colonies and some polygamy may occur.  They nest in open areas on the ground, on dry hummocks or ridges among tall grass or under shrubs.  The female builds the nest, a small depression lined with grass and feathers, and incubates 6-8 eggs for 24-37 days.  The male brings food while she is on the nest.  While the female broods the young, the male continues to bring food.  The young may wander off the nest at 12-18 days.  They can fly at 27-36 days and hunt on their own 1-2 weeks after their first flight.  Family groups remain together for a time, roosting together during the day.	Short-eared Owls living in cold regions are migratory.  Their migration pattern is irregular and nomadic.  They appear to concentrate where prey is abundant.  Most Short-eared Owls in the western Washington lowlands valleys and along the coast are winter visitors.	short-eared_owl	SEOW			
50	60	Asio	otus	Long-eared Owl	Uncommon resident, mostly east.	LC	The conservation status of Long-eared Owls is not well known.  Populations appear stable in most of North America, although they have declined in some areas due to habitat loss.  In many areas, they may benefit from human-created forest fragmentation, which creates open areas for hunting adjacent to wooded areas for nesting.  Protection of wooded river corridors and other isolated tree groves, especially in arid areas, is important for their local survival.	Long-eared Owls are brownish-gray, medium-sized owls with long ear-tufts, hence the name.  They have distinctive rufous-orange facial disks.  They are mostly gray above, with dark and russet patches at each wrist, conspicuous in flight.  Below, wings are mostly buff, and the patches at the wrists are dark.  Long-eared owls are barred and streaked with dark brown and rufous on their breasts and bellies.  In flight they can be hard to tell from the closely related Short-eared owls, except by behavior and habitat.		1	Long-eared Owls breed in dense coniferous or broadleaved woodlands with adjacent open areas where they hunt.  They are often found in wooded areas along streams and in planted windbreaks.  During the winter, they roost in dense vegetation.  East of the Cascades this is often in conifers, willows, Russian olives, or junipers, and west of the Cascades in conifers, willows, or ash trees.	Long-eared Owls are rare breeders and uncommon winter visitors in western Washington, but there are breeding records from Whatcom, Skagit, and King Counties.  In eastern Washington, Long-eared Owls are fairly common year round.  In winter, they are believed to be most common in the wheat country of southeastern Washington, with roosts of up to 50 birds in Walla Walla County.  There is a large winter roost in the Moxee Valley (Yakima County).  The Lower Crab Creek area in Grant County is a good place to look for them in breeding season.	Long-eared Owls are not as vocal as most other owls and are rarely heard outside of the breeding season.  They hunt mostly at night, although they are sometimes active before dusk, especially when they are feeding young.  They are chase-predators and hunt by flying fly back and forth low over the ground.  When they locate prey by sound or sight, they swoop down and seize it with their talons.  Males perform a zigzag aerial courtship display with intermittent wing-claps.  Outside the breeding season, large roosts often form, and courtship typically begins at these roosts.	Long-eared Owls eat a variety of small mammals, especially mice and voles.  They sometimes also take small birds and reptiles.	Uncommon in eastern Kittitas County, mostly in riparian areas at low and moderate elevation, often adopting magpie nests for breeding. No records from western Washington, although true status there as well as at higher elevation east of Cascade crest unknown. Doubtless under-recorded; one record from 30 May 1999 near Taneum Meadow in Kittitas County hints at wider distribution. Breeding confirmed at Seattle's Discovery Park year after end of atlas period; has also nested rarely in Whatcom, Skagit, and Thurston Counties. May disperse upslope to alpine parkland in late summer.	Monogamous pairs often form at winter roosts.  Long-eared Owls usually nest in abandoned stick nests, often the nests of magpies, crows, ravens, or hawks.  On occasion they nest in cavities or brushy tangles.  They do not add nesting material.  Females lay 2'10 eggs, usually 5-6, and incubate them 26-28 days.  During incubation, the male brings food to the female on the nest.  After the young hatch, the male alone brings food to the young and to the brooding mother. When brooding ends, the female begins to hunt and to help feed the young. Young owlets venture out of the nest onto nearby branches at about three weeks, and begin taking short flights at about five weeks.  The female generally abandons the young about 6 ½ to 8 weeks after they hatch, but the male continues to feed them until they are 10-11 weeks old.	Long-eared Owls are sometimes considered resident throughout their breeding range, but it is likely that most birds do migrate, especially those in the northern part of their range.  They are nomadic at times, usually in response to food shortages.	long-eared_owl				
51	60	Athene	cunicularia	Burrowing Owl	Uncommon summer east, rare winter.	LC	Burrowing Owls have declined significantly in most of their historical range.  The United States Fish and Wildlife Service lists them as a species of concern, and the Washington Gap Analysis project lists them as a species-at-risk.  The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife is considering Burrowing Owl for listing.  Habitat loss, with destruction of available nesting burrows and the conversion of shrub-steppe areas to agriculture, has been the major cause of the decline.  Ground squirrel and prairie dog control measures have worked too well, and the decline in their populations has led to the loss of burrows available for nesting.  Burrowing Owls can live in areas converted to agriculture if pesticide use is limited and the nest burrows are not plowed over.  Artificial burrows have been used successfully in some areas.  Burrowing Owls are seriously declining in Washington, especially in the Channeled Scablands, the Okanogan Valley, and southeastern Washington.	Burrowing Owls are long-legged, ground-dwelling owls.  Adults are light brown, mottled with white.  They have white throats and eyebrows, and yellow eyes.  Immatures are light brown, less distinctively mottled than adults, and have buffy, unstreaked bellies.  In contrast to most other owls and almost all other raptor species, females are smaller than males.		1	Typical Burrowing Owl habitat is flat, open terrain with soft soil, short grass, sparsely distributed vegetation, or exposed ground.  Historically, they were found in association with prairie dogs and other burrowing mammals (but see below.)  Burrowing Owls are frequently seen along the banks of irrigation canals.	Small numbers of Burrowing Owls formerly bred in western Washington prairies, but the owls are now limited to the shrub-steppe zone of eastern Washington.  Several artificial burrows are currently being used in the potholes area (Grant County.)  The Hanford site and the surrounding tri-cities area host the highest concentration in the state.  Burrowing Owls can be found in Washington from mid-March through August and rarely during the winter as well.	Burrowing Owls often live in loose colonies, with adults standing guard near the nest burrows.  They are active both day and night, especially during the breeding season, although they are most active at dawn and dusk.  They hunt by swooping down from perches and surprising prey, by hovering over open areas, and by running along the ground to chase prey down.  They catch their prey in their talons and can even snatch flying insects from mid-air.	Burrowing Owls are opportunistic feeders, preying on large invertebrates, small mammals, and other birds.  During the breeding season they eat mostly insects and other invertebrates.  In winter, when invertebrates are scarce, owls that remain at northern latitudes take largely vertebrate prey.	Rare in shrub-steppe of southeastern Kittitas County. Records of breeders limited to several sites on Yakima Training Center, where breeding confirmed during and beyond atlas period by Center biologists (Margaret Pounds, pers. comm.), and to site west of Yakima River in L.T. Murray Wildlife Area, at southern edge of county. Formerly nested along Old Vantage Highway and near Umtanum Creek drainage along Yakima County line, with withdrawal apparently related to general population decline. Speculation has linked lower numbers of fossorial mammals that owls depend on as secondary burrow inhabitants to owl's predicament in Washington and other parts of West.	Burrowing Owls form monogamous pair bonds during the nesting season.  They nest in burrows, but with the exception of the population in Florida, do not dig their own.  They use prairie dog towns and ground squirrel burrows when they are available, but they also nest in drainage pipes and artificial burrows.  They do not bring nest material to the burrow.  The female incubates 7-10 eggs for 28-30 days, while the male brings her food.  After the young hatch, the female broods for 1-2 weeks, and the male continues to provide all food.  Once brooding is complete, both adults feed the young.  Young Burrowing Owls leave the nest after about six weeks and can hunt for themselves at 7-8 weeks.	Except for the population in Florida, Burrowing Owls are migratory.  Most spend the winter in southern Mexico and Central America.  Owls breeding in Washington migrate south along the coast and winter in California, occasionally as far south as Mexico.	burrowing_owl				
52	6	Aythya	affinis	Lesser Scaup	Common winter. Uncommon breeder.	LC	Declines have been observed in response to degradation of habitat, but the Lesser Scaup remains one of the most numerous and widespread North American ducks. It is difficult to determine long-term population trends of Lesser Scaup due to the similarity between the two species of scaups, large yearly fluctuations, and the late migration and breeding season of the Lesser Scaup. The North American population is not currently endangered, but is lower than desired by wildlife officials. Protection, restoration, and enhancement of habitats used during all seasons is under way to enable the population to rebound.	The Lesser Scaup is one of the most abundant diving ducks in the Northwest. Male Lesser Scaups have white flanks, black rumps and breasts, and lined gray backs.  They have purplish-black, iridescent heads and yellow eyes.  Their bills are light gray-blue. Males in non-breeding plumage have black heads and breasts, brown bodies, and black rumps. Females are brownish overall, also with yellow eyes, and white at the base of their bills.  Greater and Lesser Scaups can be difficult to distinguish in the field.  Lesser Scaups average about 10% shorter and 25% lighter than Greater Scaups.  The Lesser has a peaked, angular head that the Greater lacks.  Seen in flight, the white on the Lesser Scaup's wings fades to gray in the primaries.  In the Greater Scaup, the white extends into the primaries.  As always, taking into account habitat, range, and season may help differentiate between the two species, as well as using a field guide and working with experienced observers.		1	In winter, Lesser Scaups are often found in dense flocks of hundreds and even thousands, on lakes, reservoirs, rivers, and sheltered bays. Lesser Scaup are far more likely than Greater Scaup to be found on fresh water inland during the winter. In summer, nesting habitat is small wetlands with emergent vegetation in boreal forests and parklands. During migration, Lesser Scaups spend their time on rivers, lakes, and large wetlands.	Most Lesser Scaups breed north of Washington, in sedge-dominated marshes in boreal climates, but some do breed in Washington.  Although they are commonly found year round in appropriate habitat in eastern Washington, they are uncommon breeders here.  They are rare and local breeders in lowland ponds in the Puget Trough, with breeding confirmed at the Kent Sewage Ponds (King County), in Everett (Snohomish County), and Whidbey Island (Island County). They are common winter residents (from November to early May) in western Washington, and uncommon non-breeding residents the rest of the year.	Lesser Scaups are divers, and can be very active when feeding. These scaups, like other ducks, form new pair bonds each year. They are one of the latest North American ducks to pair, with most pairs forming late in migration. They are gregarious throughout the year, with the exception of the laying and incubation period.	Aquatic invertebrates such as insect larvae, crustaceans, and mollusks make up the majority of the Lesser Scaup's diet. Seeds and other parts of plants are also eaten.	Rare and local in Island and lowland King Counties and along Columbia River in Kittitas County; no BBA records for Kitsap County. Only confirmed breeding records from Kent Ponds in King County and Deer Lagoon on Whidbey Island. Broods also noted annually at latter location since close of atlas period. Lesser Scaup breed in freshwater lakes, marshes, ponds, and sewage lagoons.	Most Lesser Scaups probably breed at the age of two, nesting in late May through June. The nests are usually located on dry land close to water, in areas with dense cover, especially bulrush. The female builds the nest, which is a shallow bowl lined with grass and down. She lays 8 to 10 eggs and incubates them for 21 to 27 days. The male leaves when incubation begins. The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and head to the water, where they are tended by the female, but feed themselves. Two or more broods may come together and be cared for jointly by the females. The young fledge at 47 to 54 days, usually in late August or early September.	Lesser Scaups are among the latest migrants moving north in the spring, still moving toward their breeding grounds in mid-May. In the fall, migration is equally late, with the last birds leaving the breeding grounds only when the water freezes.	lesser_scaup	LESC			
53	6	Aythya	americana	Redhead	Common resident east. Rare west.	LC	Although still a common duck, the total population of Redheads is far below historic levels and they have experienced a sharper decline than most ducks in recent years. Loss of nesting habitat is their greatest threat. Distribution patterns of Redheads changed dramatically during the 20th century and they are now common in some areas where they used to be scarce.	Female and juvenile Redheads are brownish-gray overall, with gray legs, black eyes and a gray bill with a black tip. Males in breeding plumage have a gray body, black rump and breast, and a bright rufous head with a yellow eye and a light blue bill with a black tip. The male in non-breeding plumage (from July to September) is overall dark brown, but still has a dull reddish head. Redheads are a little smaller than the similar looking Canvasbacks, with a rounder head, a lighter back, and a more typically duck-shaped bill.		1	Redheads nest on marshy freshwater lakes, ponds, slow moving rivers and other wetlands in prairie zones. During migration they gather on large lakes and they spend the winter on sheltered saltwater bays and estuaries and some inland lakes.	The Redhead is one of the most common ducks east of the Columbia River during the breeding season, although it is less common in much of the southern Columbia Basin. Many spend the winter in eastern Washington, but they are much less common during this season than the breeding season. In western Washington, Redheads are a rare breeder, with two confirmed nesting records west of the Cascades. During fall migration they are uncommon in the west (mid-October to mid-November) and uncommon to rare through the winter (until the end of April).	Redheads usually gather in small flocks, often mixed with other diving duck species. But in the winter they congregate in very large flocks, made up of tens of thousands of birds. Although they are considered divers, they often feed by dabbling. A notable behavior of the Redhead is their tendency to parasitize, or lay eggs in other duck's nests. Many ducks will lay eggs in each others nests, but the Redhead takes this practice to another level. Female Redheads regularly parasitize each other, and at least ten other species of duck, and some non-duck species as well. Most females parasitize in addition to raising their own brood, but some females may be entirely parasitic, not raising their own brood at all. Sometimes, dump nests occur that are untended and never incubated, but may have up to 87 eggs in them.	The leaves, stems, seeds and roots of aquatic plants make up the majority of the diet. Many aquatic invertebrates are also eaten, especially in the summer.	Primarily eastern Washington species, breeding in wetlands, lakes, ponds, and slow-moving streams east and north of Columbia River. Predicted to breed along whole length of Columbia River in Kittitas County by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Pairs recorded twice in adjacent blocks along Columbia on 23&#8211;24 May 1997 support Gap prediction, although breeding habitat limited and local. Not recorded west of Cascades in our study except at Kent Ponds in southern King County, where breeding confirmed in 1988 and 1995.	Nests are located close together in dense marshes, especially areas with dense bulrush, above shallow water or on dry land. The female builds a bulky bowl out of vegetation and, if it is in water, anchors it to some emergent vegetation. The nest is then lined with down. Actual clutch size is difficult to determine due to the Redhead's parasitism, but clutch size usually ranges between 6-14 eggs. The female incubates for about 23-29 days, during which time, the male leaves. About a day after hatching, the female leads the young away from the nest to water, where they feed themselves. The young are capable of flight after 60-65 days.	After pair bonds dissolve the males may fly hundreds of miles north to gather on large lakes and go through a flightless stage. The main migration is fairly early in the fall, peaking in August and September. Spring migration usually lasts from February to May. The Redhead is the only duck that winters in greater numbers in the interior rather than on the coast, and in Washington numbers during migration are heavier in the eastern half of the state than the west.	redhead	REDH			
54	6	Aythya	collaris	Ring-necked Duck	Common winter. Uncommon breeder.	LC	Numbers of Ring-necked Ducks across North America appear stable, but they are difficult to survey and estimates are not precise. Historically, Ring-necked Ducks were dispersed in small flocks across the winter range in available habitat. Changes in habitat have resulted in a concentration of Ring-necked Ducks at a smaller number of sites. Habitat degradation has been less of an issue on breeding grounds, as they are fairly remote. A generalized diet may allow the Ring-necked Duck to colonize new areas and habitats that other species might not be able to use, and this may be why it seems to be faring well. Lead poisoning is an issue of concern, and lead-shot ingestion rates for Ring-necked Ducks are among the highest of North American waterfowl. Although lead shot is banned for hunting waterfowl in the United States and Canada, it is still used in upland game-hunting, and many wetlands hold sunken pellets from years past.	A compact duck with a peaked head, the Ring-necked Duck does have a ringed neck, but the ring is almost never visible in the field. Overall, the Ring-necked Duck is similar in appearance to both the Greater and Lesser Scaups. The male Ring-necked Duck in breeding plumage has a deep-black, iridescent head, breast, and rump, and light flanks. Unlike the scaups, the Male Ring-necked Duck has a black back. He also has a white spur at the shoulder, gray bill outlined with white and with a white ring near the black tip, and yellow eyes. The male in non-breeding plumage is browner on the flanks, but with a darker head, breast, and back. Its bill lacks the white outline, and has a black tip. The Female Ring-necked Duck looks similar to female Greater and Lesser Scaups. She is brown overall with lighter-gray cheeks. Like the scaups, she has a white crescent at the base of her bill, although it is less distinctive than that of either the Greater or Lesser Scaup. The Female Ring-necked Duck can be distinguished from the scaups by the thin, white eye-ring that trails back to her ear, and the peaked shape of her head, as well as by differing habitat. Juveniles look like females.		1	Ring-necked Ducks nest in small, wooded ponds in boreal forests and some prairie regions. In migration and during winter, they inhabit ponds, lakes, slow-moving rivers, and occasionally coastal estuaries, but generally do not inhabit saltwater bays. Shallow, freshwater marshes with dense stands of submergent and emergent vegetation are preferred in all seasons.	Ring-necked Ducks are uncommon as breeders in low-elevation wetlands in eastern Washington, but rare east of the channeled scablands. In the higher-elevation wetlands in the northeastern corner of the state and in the eastern Cascades, where wooded wetlands are more common, they are fairly common breeders. In the Puget Trough, the Ring-necked Duck is a rare breeder. Its preference for shallow water in breeding areas may account for its relative scarcity in western Washington where many of the ponds, lakes, and reservoirs are quite deep. On both sides of the Cascades, in appropriate habitat, Ring-necked Ducks are common during migration and through the winter.	The Ring-necked Duck forages by diving, but is usually found in shallow water and forages and dabbles at the surface as well. This duck is strong and fast and, unlike many diving ducks, can take flight directly from the water without a running start.	More generalized than other diving ducks, the Ring-necked Duck eats mostly seeds, roots, and tubers. Aquatic invertebrates are also eaten, especially by breeding females and the young.	Uncommon throughout Puget Trough lowlands and at mid-elevations along Yakima River Valley in western half of Kittitas County, preferring wetlands surrounded by woodlands or forests. Only confirmed record comes from Nelson, south of Cle Elum Lake. Dearth of records from most of Kittitas County does not support overgenerous breeding range throughout county's forest zones predicted by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	Pairs form during spring migration. Ring-necked Ducks nest on dry hummocks close to water or on mats of floating vegetation in the water. The nest is a shallow bowl of vegetation and down. Most of the nest construction (by the female alone) is complete when incubation begins. The female typically lays 8 to 10 eggs and incubates them for 25 to 29 days. The pair bond dissolves when the female begins to incubate. Twelve to 24 hours after the ducklings hatch, they head to the water where they feed themselves. The female tends the young, and may continue to brood them at night for some time. Unlike many divers, which bring their broods out into the open water, the female Ring-necked Duck hides her brood in the marsh. The young are capable of flight at 49 to 55 days. The female usually stays with the young until this point, but she may leave before the young have fledged.	Fall migration starts in September and lasts until early December, with the majority of movement in October and November. Breeding birds from east of the Cascades move through the Great Plains to winter in the highlands of Arizona, New Mexico, and northern Mexico. Western Washington breeders winter along the Pacific coast from British Columbia to northern Central America with the greatest concentration in California's Central Valley. Males tend to winter farther north than females. Spring migration lasts from early February through March.	ring-necked_duck	RNDU			
55	6	Aythya	fuligula	Tufted Duck		LC		The most frequently encountered of Washington&#8217;s rare waterfowl, Tufted Duck is a Eurasian member of a widely distributed genus of diving ducks that includes Greater and Lesser Scaups and Ring-necked Duck. The male in breeding plumage is told from these similar species by its solid black back and bright white sides with no vermiculation and by a tuft of plumes that hangs down from the rear of the crown (difficult to see when wet and plastered against the head, as it often is when the duck has been diving). The bill has a broad black tip with little or no white behind it. Tufted Duck females, juveniles, and non-breeding-plumaged males are more or less uniformly brown with a much smaller plume or none at all. They are easily confused with scaups and Ring-necked Ducks in similar plumages, and are best separated from them by subtle details of head and bill shape and markings. Hybrids&#8212;especially with Greater Scaup&#8212;further complicate field identification.

The Tufted Duck breeds at high and middle latitudes from Iceland eastward to Siberia and winters farther south in Europe, Africa, and Asia. Significant numbers reach North America in fall migration and spend the winter, mostly along the Atlantic and Pacific coasts. They are usually found as single birds associating with flocks of scaup or Ring-necked Ducks, often in city parks, and sometimes return for successive years. Washington has had about 50 records since the first one in Seattle (King County) in 1967, and Tufted Duck has been an almost annual visitor to the state since 1979, mostly west of the Cascades. There are now about 10 eastern Washington records, with the first from Wenatchee (Chelan County) in 1986. Oregon has had about 30 records since 1960, and Tufted Duck is annual in British Columbia. Three records have been accepted in Idaho.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								tufted_duck				
56	6	Aythya	marila	Greater Scaup	Common winter resident. Rare summer.	LC	Greater Scaups appear to be abundant, although confusion between the Greater and Lesser Scaup makes it difficult to track changes in population. Estimates of scaup populations across North America put the Greater Scaup at about 11% of the combined continental scaup population, although the majority of the scaup wintering in Puget Sound are Greater Scaups. Their heavy concentration in coastal bays in winter makes the population vulnerable to oil spills and other pollution.	The male Greater Scaup has white flanks, a black rump and breast, and barred gray back. He has a green-black iridescent head and light gray-blue bill. The adult in its second year has a yellow eye. The male in non-breeding plumage has a black head and breast, brown body, and black rump. The female is brownish overall, also with a yellow eye after the age of two. The female also has a white semi-circle at the base of the beak. The Greater and Lesser Scaup can be difficult to distinguish in the field. The Greater Scaup averages about 10% longer and 20% heavier than the Lesser Scaup. The Lesser Scaup has a peaked, angular head that the Greater Scaup lacks. The Greater Scaup has a larger bill with a more pronounced nail (tip of the bill) than the Lesser Scaup. Seen in flight, the white on the wings of the Greater Scaup extends into the primaries, where it is gray on the Lesser Scaup. Habitat, range, and season may help differentiate between the two species, as well as using a field guide and working with experienced observers.		1	The Greater Scaup is the more northerly of the two species of North American Scaup. In the summer, they breed on marshy, lowland tundra at the northern limits of the boreal forest. In winter, they gather in coastal bays, lagoons, and estuaries, with some wintering on inland lakes. While the Greater Scaup does overlap with the Lesser Scaup in winter, it tends to frequent more open, exposed areas.	Greater Scaups are found during migration and winter in bodies of water in all lowland areas of Washington, although they are more common in salt water than they are in fresh water habitats. West of the Cascades, Greater Scaups start arriving in August and become common from September to mid-May, when most depart for northern breeding areas. Small numbers regularly summer in sewage ponds in western Washington. East of the Cascades they can be found from mid-October until mid-April before heading north.	Outside of the breeding season, Greater Scaup form large flocks or rafts, numbering in the thousands. In tidal waters, they tend to face up-current. While individuals may drift downstream, birds from the back of the flock fly to the front, maintaining the raft in the same position. A diver, the Greater Scaup catches its food under water, but eats it on the surface. Occasionally scaups forage at or near the water's surface as well.	Mollusks and plant material are both important components of the Greater Scaup's diet. In the summer, aquatic insects and crustaceans are also eaten.		While Greater Scaup may nest at one year of age, they are more likely to begin breeding at the age of two. Pair formation begins in late winter or early spring on the wintering grounds and during migration back to the breeding grounds. The pair bond lasts until the female begins to incubate, and then the male leaves. Nests are located close to the water on an island, shoreline, or floating mat of vegetation, often close together in loose colonies. The female makes a shallow depression lined with grass. During incubation, the female adds down to the nest. Incubation of the 6 to 9 eggs lasts for 23 to 28 days. Soon after they hatch, the female leads the young to the water. Multiple broods may form small crèches and be tended by one or more females. The young can swim and find their own food immediately, but can't fly until about 40 to 45 days old.	Greater Scaups wintering in Washington breed in Alaska, although not all Alaskan scaups migrate down the West Coast.  Some migrate along the Mississippi and Eastern flyways.	greater_scaup	GRSC			
57	6	Aythya	valisineria	Canvasback	Common migrant, locally fairly common winter resident. Uncommon breeder east.	LC	Although numbers vary considerably from year to year, the overall trend is one of long-term decline, mostly due to habitat loss. In fact, hunting seasons were closed in the Atlantic Flyway in the mid-1990s to allow recovery of very low population levels. In order to reverse this trend, the loss and degradation of wetlands needs to be arrested. The breeding range in Washington, which is at the southern edge of the North American breeding range, appears to be shrinking, and some areas that look like suitable habitat do not have nesting Canvasbacks. In these areas, Redheads may outcompete Canvasbacks.	The Canvasback is a medium-sized duck with an elegant pattern of black, russet, and white. Males in breeding plumage have white-to-light-gray bodies, black undertail coverts and breasts, and deep rufous heads with red eyes. Adult males in non-breeding plumage have slightly darker bodies, but look similar. Female Canvasbacks are an overall grayish-brown in color, with a slightly browner head and neck. Juveniles look similar to females, but with less distinction between the head, neck, and body color. All ages and plumages have long, gently sloping black bills that give them a distinctive profile. This profile is one of the best ways to distinguish between the Canvasback and the similar-looking Redhead. Canvasbacks are also larger than Redheads, with long, flattish heads, and much whiter body coloration. Males can also be differentiated by their red eyes (male Redheads have yellow eyes) and bill color (black in Canvasbacks, blue with a black tip in Redheads).		1	Canvasbacks breed in shallow prairie lakes and ponds with marshy shorelines, especially those with bulrush. They typically inhabit large lakes during migration. In winter they frequent sheltered lakes, saltwater bays, and estuaries. They also use sewage lagoons.	Canvasbacks breed in eastern Washington at Potholes Reservoir and Winchester Wasteway (Grant County), at Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge (Spokane County), and in Okanogan County. Confirmed nesting records from the last ten years are limited to these three counties, although summer sightings of non-breeders may occur in appropriate habitat throughout the state. The Canvasback is a common migrant, appearing in late August at the earliest and becoming more common in October through November. In winter, Canvasbacks are found in lowlands west of the Cascades as well as in eastern Washington, although they are more common on salt water during the winter than on fresh water. They typically leave the wintering grounds in mid-April. Seward Park in Seattle is an excellent place to find wintering Canvasbacks.	In winter Canvasbacks gather in large flocks, often mixed with scaups. As divers, Canvasbacks usually find food under water but will also feed at the surface. Canvasbacks, like most other North American ducks, are seasonally monogamous. Most pairs form at stopover points during spring migration.	The bases and roots of aquatic plants, as well as some leaves and seeds, make up the majority of the Canvasback's diet. Wild celery is particularly favored. Mollusks, aquatic insects, and some small fish are also eaten, especially by nesting females and young.		The nest, built by the female, is situated in dense emergent vegetation above shallow water, and sometimes on dry ground. It is a bulky bowl of vegetation lined with down. The female lays and incubates 8 to 10 eggs for 24 to 29 days. Several hours after the young hatch, the female leads them to open water where they feed themselves. They are tended by the female for several weeks. The male leaves during incubation, and the female leaves several weeks after the young hatch. The ducklings are left to fend for themselves until they can fly, at about 60 to 70 days.	Canvasbacks migrate late in fall and early in spring. Birds migrate in flocks, in a V-formation. Migration is relatively quick in the spring, but more drawn out in fall, lasting from late August to November.	canvasback	CANV			
58	57	Bartramia	longicauda	Upland Sandpiper	Accidental summer and migrant.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the Upland Sandpiper population at about 350,000 birds. Most of the population is concentrated in the Great Plains, where they are still common. In both the northeastern and northwestern portion of their range, Upland Sandpipers have become far less common. Although they were probably never abundant in the Northwest, they formerly bred widely in eastern Washington.  With the loss of native grassland habitat, the Northwest population has now dwindled to a few small, isolated populations.  The last remaining Washington population, near Spokane, is most likely extirpated. With the Spokane population gone, a small population in Idaho, another group in Montana, and a few dozen pairs in Oregon are the only breeding Upland Sandpipers that remain in the Northwest. The Upland Sandpiper is still listed as a state endangered species and a Gap Analysis species-at-risk.	The Upland Sandpiper is a black, brown, and white mottled bird with a long neck and tail and yellow legs. It has a round head with large, black eyes, and a relatively short bill for a sandpiper.  In flight, it shows a pale inner wing, dark outer wing, and white outer primary shaft.		1	Native grassland is the Upland Sandpiper's preferred habitat.  It typically feeds in shortgrass areas, where it is found in migration and during winter.  The Upland Sandpiper requires taller grass for nesting. It is almost never found on mudflats or in wetland environments where other shorebirds are found. These birds are common nesters at airfields and airports throughout their range.	The last confirmed records of breeding Upland Sandpipers in Washington were in 1993, from the population in the Newman Lake area between Spokane (Spokane County) and the Idaho border.  Migrants are recorded about once a year in the Pacific Northwest. They are occasional in the spring in May, but are more often seen in the fall, in August throughout eastern Washington, and from late August to September along the coast.  In the fall, most birds are juveniles, probably from the Alaska/Yukon breeding population.	During the breeding season, Upland Sandpipers often perch on fence posts or utility poles.  They forage by walking quickly through the grass with jerky movements, picking up items from the ground or from low vegetation.	Upland Sandpipers eat mostly insects, but also feed on waste grains and other seeds.		Upland Sandpipers may nest in loose colonies, in which case the colony has a highly synchronous nesting pattern, meaning that all the chicks hatch at the same time. Nests are shallow scrapes on the ground in dense grass. They are often well hidden from above with grass arching over the top.  Both parents help build the nest and incubate the 4 eggs for 22 to 27 days.  The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and, while the young feed themselves, the parents protect and tend them. The young first fly at 30 to 31 days.	Upland Sandpipers are long-distance migrants, spending the winter in the pampas of southern South America. Migration is typically through the Great Plains, but is more spread out in the fall with juveniles reaching to the coasts.  Fall migration begins in mid-July and usually lasts through September. Spring migration is from March through May.	upland_sandpiper				
59	9	Bombycilla	cedrorum	Cedar Waxwing	Common summer resident. Irregular winter.	LC	Populations fluctuate considerably from year to year, but the long-term trend appears to be stable or increasing.  Cedar Waxwings seem to be expanding their range and increasing in residential areas perhaps due to an increase in edge habitat and the planting of ornamental fruit trees.	Cedar Waxwings are sleek, masked birds with unusual red, waxy deposits at the tips of their secondary feathers.  They are cinnamon-colored, with grayish wings and tails and yellow terminal tail-bands.  They have distinctive crested heads, black throats, and black masks lined with white.  Their bellies have a yellowish tinge, and their undertail coverts are white.  Juveniles are mottled gray-brown, and have black masks and yellow tail-bands.  The red feather-tips increase in number and size as the birds age.  The only bird in Washington that could be confused with a Cedar Waxwing is a Bohemian Waxwing.  Bohemians are larger and grayer than Cedars, without the yellow tinge underneath.  They have rufous undertail coverts and white-and-yellow wing markings that Cedar Waxwings lack.		1	Cedar Waxwings inhabit open, lowland woodlands with shrubs and small trees, especially when berry-producing shrubs are present.  They are often found in streamside woods and avoid the forest interior.  They are common in forest clearings, wetlands, edges, residential areas, orchards, and stands of Russian olive.	Cedar Waxwings are common breeders in open woodlands, edge habitat, and wetland sites all over Washington.  During winter, they are fairly common, but patchily distributed, east of the Cascades, especially in Spokane (Spokane County).  They are present, but fairly uncommon, in western Washington in winter.	Flocks are common in all seasons, but reach their greatest density (into the thousands) during fall and winter.  There may be Bohemian Waxwings mixed in with Cedar Waxwing flocks during winter.  They often perch atop dead or defoliated trees, from which they fly out to catch aerial insects.	Cedar Waxwings eat some insects, but are primarily fruit-eaters, a trait that dictates much of their behavior.  They eat almost exclusively fruit in the winter, relying on the berries of mountain ash, juniper, dogwood, and others.  They also forage on fruit crops in orchards, especially cherries.  Waxwings are susceptible to alcohol intoxication, and even death, from eating fermented fruit.  Like most songbirds, they feed insects to their young at first, but switch to feeding the young berries within a few days.	Common and widespread at low and middle elevations throughout four-county area. Nests generally below 3,000 feet in variety of habitats, including forest clearings, orchards, wetlands, bogs, riparian corridors, parks, and neighborhoods. Requires small trees for nesting adjacent to suitable foraging opportunities for berries and insects. Prefers deciduous growth, so may be increasing in residential areas where ornamental tree plantings have replaced conifer forest. Utilizes Russian olive groves in Kittitas County, but absent from much of steppe zone. Transient birds well into June may skew true breeding distribution.	Cedar Waxwings are among the latest nesting birds in North America, and this enables them to capitalize on the abundance of fruit in late summer and early fall.  They are monogamous, and may nest in small colonies.  During courtship, the male and female pass food items back and forth with their bills.  Both members of the pair help build the nest, which is usually on a horizontal branch or fork of a deciduous tree.  The nest is a loose, open cup, made of grass and twigs, lined with moss, rootlets, fine grass, bark, and hair.  The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for about 12 days, and then broods the young for about 3 days.  The male brings food to the nest during this time, and afterwards, both parents feed the young.  The nestlings fledge at about 15 days, but stay close to the nest and are fed by the parents for another 6 to 10 days.  After that they may join a flock of other juvenile birds.	Cedar Waxwings are nomadic and irruptive, and wander in search of food sources, rather than undertake a typical migration.  Fruit availability may be a more important predictor of winter presence than temperature or latitude.  Most populations do move south for the winter, but some Washington breeders may be year-round residents.	cedar_waxwing	CEDW			
60	9	Bombycilla	garrulus	Bohemian Waxwing	Uncommon winter east. Irregular west.	LC	Populations fluctuate considerably from year to year, but Christmas Bird Count data reveal a slightly declining long-term trend.	Bohemian Waxwings are sleek, masked birds with unusual red, waxy deposits at the tips of their secondary feathers.  They are grayish-brown with white and yellow wing-patches and yellow terminal tail-bands.  They have distinctive crested heads, black throats, and black masks lightly lined with white.  Their heads have a rufous tinge, and their undertail coverts are rufous.  Juveniles have most of the aforementioned field marks, but are mottled gray-brown and lack the feather-tips.  The feather-tips seem to increase in number and size as the birds age.  The only bird in Washington that could be confused with a Bohemian Waxwing is a Cedar Waxwing, a far more common relative.  Cedars are smaller and browner than Bohemians and have a yellow tinge underneath.  They lack the rufous undertail coverts and white and yellow wing markings of Bohemian Waxwings.		1	Bohemian Waxwings breed in open areas and edges of boreal forests, often in places with sparse tree cover above brushy understory.  During winter, they can be found in a variety of habitats, as long as there is fruit available.  They often congregate in towns with abundant plantings of fruit-bearing trees.	Most Bohemian Waxwings in Washington are northern breeders that come down into Washington in winter.  In most years they are fairly common in winter in northeastern Washington (Ferry, Douglas, Okanogan, Stevens, and Pend Oreille Counties), especially in cities and towns where they feed on fruit trees.  In some years they extend farther west into the Columbia Basin (Cle Elum and Ellensburg), and can rarely be seen west of the Cascades.  Bohemian Waxwings are rare breeders in Washington in the North Cascades at Hart's Pass (Whatcom County) and Holman Pass (Okanogan County).	Flocks are common in all seasons, but nomadic winter flocks of hundreds of birds are the most common sighting in Washington.  Bohemian Waxwings may be mixed in with more common Cedar Waxwing flocks during the winter.  They often perch atop trees to forage for fruits and berries. In summer, they fly out to catch aerial insects.	Bohemian Waxwings eat some insects, but are primarily fruit-eaters, a trait that dictates much of their behavior.  They eat almost nothing but fruit in the winter, relying on the berries of mountain ash, juniper, holly, and others.  They also forage on fruit crops and ornamental plantings.  Waxwings are susceptible to alcohol intoxication, and even death, from eating fermented fruit.  Like most songbirds, they feed insects to their young at first, but switch to feeding the young berries within a few days.		Bohemian Waxwings are monogamous, and both members of the pair help build the nest, which is usually on a horizontal branch of a spruce tree.  The nest is a loose, open cup made of grass, twigs, and moss, lined with feathers and fine grass.  The female incubates 4 to 6 eggs for about 14 to 15 days.  Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 14 to 18 days. The young stay close to the nest and are fed by the parents for another few days.  Family groups may stay together through the fall.	This nomadic and irruptive species wanders in search of food sources, rather than undertaking a typical migration.  Food availability seems to be a more important predictor of winter presence than temperature or latitude.	bohemian_waxwing				
61	46	Bonasa	umbellus	Ruffed Grouse	Fairly common resident.	LC	There are three separate subspecies of Ruffed Grouse in Washington. Bonasa umbellus castanea is found on the Olympic Peninsula and in southwest Washington. B. u. sabini is found in the Puget Trough and the western Cascades. B. u. phaia is the subspecies found in eastern Washington. Logging throughout western Washington has resulted in the conversion of mature coniferous forests to second-growth hardwood and mixed stands, which has probably led to increased numbers of Ruffed Grouse. They are widespread and common, although their populations fluctuate in regular cycles.	The Ruffed Grouse is a medium-sized bird measuring approximately 17' in length. The bird is the size and shape of a small chicken, with two distinct color morphs, gray and red. Both forms are cryptically patterned with black and white barring. The tail has a dark band at the end, with a lighter tip, which, like the dark ruff around the neck, is evident when fanned open. A white eye-line, small crest on top of the head, and a short, curved bill are other distinguishing characteristics.		1	Ruffed Grouse are found in mixed woods and hardwood forests. They can also be found along river corridors and throughout forested areas of Washington. They do well in early successional woods, forest openings, and along forest edges. In western Washington, they are most often found near black cottonwood, bigleaf maple, vine maple, and Sitka spruce. In eastern Washington, the quaking aspen is the most important tree species for Ruffed Grouse.	Ruffed Grouse are commonly found in hardwood and mixed forests at lower elevations throughout the state. They also inhabit forested river corridors at higher elevations and so are absent from the Columbia basin. Their habitat typically overlaps with that of the Blue Grouse, although the Blue Grouse is often found at higher elevations. Where they occur together, the Ruffed Grouse occupies river corridors.	Although not prone to flocking, they are often found in small groups, especially around winter food sources or when the families are still together. In the breeding season, males carry out their courtship display on a fallen log, puffing out their feathers, fanning their tails, and showing their ruffs while drumming the air with their wings.  The drumming can be heard from far away, each drum roll starting out slowly and quickly picking up speed.	Ruffed Grouse forage on the ground and in shrubs and trees. They are omnivores, although they feed mostly on plant material. In the winter, they eat the buds of deciduous trees, especially in areas where it snows. The large buds of aspen trees are an important winter food source. They also eat fruits, berries, twigs, leaves, catkins, and seeds. In the summer, they eat insects, spiders, snails, small snakes, and frogs. Young Ruffed Grouse eat mostly insects.	Fairly common in hardwood and mixed woodlands at low to middle elevations throughout forested parts of four-county area, especially along brushy riparian corridors. In Kittitas County, absent from Columbia Plateau below ponderosa pine zone. Extirpated in deforested landscapes of Puget Trough, although does well in regenerating clearcuts.	One male may mate with several females and does not participate in caring for the young. The female builds a nest on the ground in dense cover, usually next to a log, rock, or at the base of a tree or shrub. The nest is a depression lined with leaves, grass, needles, and some feathers. The female lays and incubates 9-12 eggs. The well-camouflaged young leave the nest shortly after hatching. The female leads them to feeding sites where the young feed themselves.	Ruffed Grouse are permanent residents in Washington, although they will make short, seasonal movements to areas with more dense cover in the winter.	ruffed_grouse				
62	8	Botaurus	lentiginosus	American Bittern	Uncommon summer resident. Rare winter.	LC	Since they are difficult to find, American Bitterns may be more widespread than many surveys indicate.  Disturbance by recreational boaters and acid precipitation are both potential threats to the population, but the most significant threat is habitat loss.  The population has declined throughout much of the United States, mostly due to wetland loss and degradation.  There is much we don't know about the biology of this secretive bird, and more research may help protect it from further losses.	A solitary species, the American Bittern is more often heard than seen.  It is a stout heron, with mottled buff-brown plumage.  Its neck can be held in to appear short and sturdy, or extended to look long and slender.  Its upperparts are solid brown, with darker outer wings.  The adult has a dark streak on either side of its neck; the streak is absent on the juvenile.		1	American Bitterns are found in dense freshwater marshes and extensive wet meadows.  They prefer wetlands with thick cattail and bulrush, mixed with areas of open water.  In the winter, they can be found in a wider range of habitats, including flooded willow and salt marshes.	The American Bittern can be found year round in the mild coastal and western Washington climate, and is primarily a summer breeder in the eastern portion of the state.  In appropriate habitat at low elevations, American Bitterns are common, although difficult to spot, year round in the west, and from April to September in eastern Washington.  Less common the rest of the year in eastern Washington, they are mainly found in large marshes and along major waterways with dense emergent vegetation.	American Bitterns stand still at the edge of the water, sometimes walking slowly.  Like most herons, they capture prey with sudden thrusts of their bills.  They are most active at dawn and dusk.  When alarmed, the bittern extends its neck and head vertically and freezes or sways with the breeze, blending in with the surrounding vegetation.  Its eyes are set low on its head, enabling the bittern to see forward when it stands in this pose. The bizarre call of the American Bittern is the easiest way to locate this hard-to-find bird.  The call is often described as sounding like a water pump.  This dramatic and unusual vocalization is often heard at dusk or dawn and can carry long distances.  The American Bittern produces this sound by spectacular contortions performed with its air-filled esophagus.	Fish and other aquatic life make up the majority of the bittern diet.  Bitterns also eat insects, amphibians, crayfish, and small mammals.	Uncommon in freshwater marshes and wet meadows in Puget Trough lowlands. Highest density in Snoqualmie and Sammamish Valleys, very local elsewhere. No BBA records for Kittitas County and not projected to breed there by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Nests in dense vegetation on ground.	The American Bittern forms loose monogamous or polygynous pair bonds. .  The male defends a nesting territory in a dense marsh but does not help with incubation or care of the young.  The female builds a nest platform of marsh vegetation and lines it with grasses.  The female alone incubates the 2-6 eggs for about 24 days.  The young eat partly digested food regurgitated by the female.  After a week or two, the young may leave the nest, but stay close by and are fed until they are about four weeks old.  First flight may take place at around 7-8 weeks.	Northern populations, where water freezes, are strongly migratory.  In milder areas, where water doesn't freeze, they will likely stay in the same area year round.  In areas where they migrate, they leave in late September or early October and return from late April to early May.	american_bittern				
63	5	Brachyramphus	brevirostris	Kittlitz's Murrelet		NT		Single January record, from Friday Harbor (San Juan County).		1								kittlitzs_murrelet				
64	5	Brachyramphus	marmoratus	Marbled Murrelet	Fairly common resident coast.	EN	Although we have little data on the historical status of the Marbled Murrelet, disturbance to nesting birds and destruction of habitat through coastal development and old-growth logging has no doubt had an impact on the population. Threats in the form of gill-nets and oil spills affect this species as well. The Marbled Murrelet was listed by the US Fish and Wildlife Service as threatened in 1992, and was listed as threatened by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife in 1993. Certain habitats have been designated as critical for Marbled Murrelets. These areas are individual trees with nesting branches suitable for nests, and forested areas within half a mile of these trees when the height of the surrounding canopy is at least half as high as the nesting tree. After many years of looking for nests, ornithologists have only found nine in Washington, although the breeding population in the state is estimated at 1,800 birds. More study is needed to understand the current status of the population and the habitat requirements of this elusive species.	Marbled Murrelets (and Kittlitz's Murrelets) are unusual among the alcids in that they molt to cryptic-brown plumage during the breeding season. In the non-breeding season, they are gray and black mixed with white above with white bellies. The top of the head is dark gray, and the bill is slender. A white throat, chin, and collar mark the face, and white extends up the sides of the rump. A dark band down the shoulders contrasts with the white collar in flight, and the bird has narrow, pointed wings. Juveniles appear similar to adults in non-breeding plumage but with a brownish-tan coloring.		1	In Washington, Marbled Murrelets inhabit calm, shallow, coastal waters and bays, but breed inland, up to 45 miles from shore, in mature, wet forest.	Marbled Murrelet are found year round in coastal areas throughout Washington. Areas of winter concentration are the southern and eastern end of the Strait of Juan de Fuca, Sequim (Clallam County), Discovery and Chuckanut Bays (Whatcom County), the San Juan Islands (San Juan County) and Puget Sound. The southern Washington coast is also considered an important wintering area. When seen offshore, Marbled Murrelets are typically found in pairs and within a mile of shore. During the breeding season, they are present along almost all of Washington's marine shoreline, concentrated in areas with abundant food and nearby nesting habitat. These areas of concentration are Tongue Point and Voice of America on the Olympic Peninsula, the south shore of Lopez Island, the southwest shore of Lummi Island, and Obstruction and Peavine Passes between Orcas and Blakely Islands in the San Juan Islands.	Often seen in pairs or small groups, Marbled Murrelets will fly low over the water with quick wing-beats when approached. They forage by swimming underwater, typically in water less than 100 feet deep, not far from shore.	Small, schooling fish make up most of the diet, which also includes a variety of other small sea creatures.	Rare and local breeder in northeast King County in mature conifer forests. One record from Kittitas County near Snoqualmie summit. Absent from Kitsap and Island Counties. Nests on high, large limbs of old-growth trees but actual nesting data sparse, since first Washington nest discovered only in 1990 (Smith et al. 1997). Forages primarily on sheltered marine waters, commuting to and from nest. Mapped lowland records from King County reflect surveys conducted during first atlas phase and may be of dubious value. For example, West Seattle record represents pair swimming in Puget Sound. Saltwater observations discounted in second atlas phase.	Where Marbled Murrelets nest was one of the last great ornithological mysteries of North America. The first Marbled Murrelet nest found by ornithologists was in Asia in 1961; a North American nest was not found until 1974. Our knowledge of their nesting practices is still limited, and only about 160 nests have been found. Marbled Murrelets appear to establish long-term pair bonds, which are initiated at sea in the early spring, and seem to be maintained throughout the year. In March and April, Marbled Murrelet pairs appear in breeding areas, and most eggs are laid between April and July. The female lays a single egg high in a tree, or infrequently, in a nest on the ground. Of the known nests, 90% were in trees, and only 10% on the ground. Tree nests are located on the branch of a mature conifer, up to 150 feet off the ground. Nest trees are found in dense, mossy, old-growth stands, and the nest itself is typically located on a mat of moss and lichen. The nest is a depression in the moss, and the droppings of the young accumulate to form a rim. The parents take turns incubating the egg, changing places every morning at dawn. For about four weeks, one incubates while the other one forages at sea. Once the chick hatches, both parents feed it for another four weeks. After this, the chick leaves the nest during the night and moves into the sea.	Although Marbled Murrelets forage in similar areas year round, they appear to be more dispersed and farther offshore in winter, although the highest densities of birds can still be found in protected water.	marbled_murrelet	MAMU			
65	5	Brachyramphus	perdix	Long-billed Murrelet		NT		Recently split from Marbled Murrelet. Five accepted records: four from the coast (three in August, one in November,)and one from the southeastern interior part of the state (in August.)		1								long-billed_murrelet				
66	6	Branta	bernicla	Brant	Common winter resident on coast.	LC	Because of their strong dependence on certain food (particularly eelgrass) and the harsh breeding environment, Brant are vulnerable to breeding failure and heavy losses from starvation, requiring careful monitoring. Pacific populations have experienced a long-term decline, but that seems to have stabilized within the last decade. Of current concern is the possibility of expansion of petroleum development on Alaska's North Slope, which may affect nesting, molting, and staging areas. There are three distinct races of Brant. Two of those races, the Black Brant and the Gray-bellied Brant, winter in Washington. Black Brant nest mainly in Alaska and winter along the Pacific coast from Alaska to Baja California, with about 90% of the population wintering in Baja. The percentage of the population wintering in Baja has grown in recent years, apparently in response to human harassment in other areas. The entire population of Gray-bellied Brant numbers about 8,000 birds. They nest in the Canadian high Arctic, and most winter in Washington's Skagit County, with a few in southern British Columbia. The small size of the Gray-bellied Brant and its concentrated distribution make it of special concern. Studies to learn more about this bird are under way and should help identify protection priorities.	The Brant is similar in appearance to the Canada Goose, but smaller and darker. The adult has a gray belly and breast, white rump, and black neck and head with a thin white necklace and no chin-strap.		1	Brant are almost exclusively coastal in their range and are found in shallow bays and saltwater marshes. They nest in the wet, coastal tundra of the high Arctic. Their winter habitat is closely tied to the occurrence of sea grasses and marine algae.	Black Brant can be found in Washington from November well into May along the outer coast and in Puget Sound.  Large concentrations may gather at Dungeness Spit (Clallam County) and Willapa Bay (Pacific County).  During the spring migration (February-April), they are widespread and can be found almost anywhere that eelgrass grows, especially at Dungeness and West Sequim Bay (Clallam County). Gray-bellied Brant arrive in Padilla and Samish Bays (Skagit County) in December and stay through the winter.	Fast fliers with swept-back wings, Brant are usually found in a flock. They forage while wading, dabbling in shallow water, or while walking on mudflats or the shore. They display strong site-fidelity to both their wintering and nesting areas.	Historically, Brant fed almost exclusively on eelgrass, which is still strongly preferred when available. Now they also forage on grasslands and have been able to diversify their diet in the absence of eelgrass, although their range is still closely tied to eelgrass. Brant also eat some aquatic invertebrates.		Long-term pair bonds usually form on the wintering grounds. Nesting occurs in loose colonies, on small islands in tundra ponds. The breeding range of the Brant is typically within five miles of the coast. The nest is similar to those of other North American geese, a shallow bowl of grass and other vegetation, lined with down. The female incubates 3 to 5 eggs for 22 to 24 days. The young leave the nest within a day of hatching, and both parents continue to tend them and lead them to sources of food. During the long days of the high-Arctic summer, the young feed at all hours, and grow quickly. They fledge at 40 to 50 days, but stay with the parents through the first migration.	No other goose nests as far north as the Brant, and few migrate as far as this long-distance traveler. During this trek, Brant fly at altitudes of several thousand feet. The West Coast population breeds primarily on Melville Island and Prince Patrick Island in the western high Arctic. They then travel to Izembek Lagoon in Alaska where they stage for over a month before heading to wintering grounds in Puget Sound.	brant	BRAN			
67	6	Branta	canadensis	Canada Goose	Common resident.	LC	Conservation of Canada Geese is difficult since one of the subspecies found in Washington is so abundant it is controlled as a nuisance (B.c. moffitti) while the others are less numerous. The situation is further complicated by altered habitat, human-assisted transplants, and interbreeding between subspecies. Historically, Canada Geese did not nest west of the Cascades, although they did migrate through.  However, as populations of Canada Geese in eastern Washington and across the rest of the country dwindled due to habitat loss and over-hunting, changes in Seattle's urban landscape (grassy yards, golf courses and parks replacing tall trees and dense shoreline under-story) provided perfect goose breeding habitat.  In order to bolster populations and expand their range, Canada Geese were introduced into western Washington from the Columbia River basin.  With few natural predators, prime habitat, and an ample food supply, the geese not only thrived, but abandoned their migratory behavior and became year-round residents.  Very high survival rates (90% for urban birds as compared with 60% for wild birds, whose main cause of mortality is hunting) and enhanced fecundity among urban Canada Geese has further fueled their population growth in the Seattle region and in other cities nationwide.

Many people consider Canada Geese a nuisance, and their droppings (each birds leaves up to three pounds of droppings a day) have forced closures of beaches, athletic fields, and other recreational areas. Within the past few years, control measures have included egg shaking and oiling, relocating, and even killing large numbers of geese. These stopgap measures, however, only temporarily reduce the urban populations, which rebound as long as they have abundant habitat and food.	NOTE: In 2004, based on genetic studies and differences in size, voice, and breeding habitat, the American Ornithologists Union split Canada Goose into two species: Cackling Goose (Branta hutchinsii) and Canada Goose (Branta canadensis).  Canada Goose comprises the (generally) larger-bodied forms; Cackling Goose comprises the smaller-bodied forms (see Cackling Goose).  

A well-known bird, the Canada Goose has a mottled gray-brown body, black legs, tail, neck, head; with a white rump band and white undertail coverts. The face is black with white cheeks, the white extending under the chin.  There are seven recognized subspecies of Canada Goose, distinguished by size, darkness or lightness of body and breast, presence or lack of a white collar at the base of the neck, and the extent of the white cheek patches. The largest and most common of the four subspecies that occur regularly in Washington State is the Western Canada Goose (B.c. moffitti), which is a migrant and year-round resident. The Lesser Canada Goose (B.c.parvipes), Dusky Canada Goose (B.c. occidentalis), and Vancouver Canada Goose (B.c. fulva) are migrants and winter visitors. A fifth subspecies, the Giant Canada Goose (B.c. maxima) has been recorded in Washington as a rare winter visitor.		1	The Canada Goose is the most widely distributed goose in North America.  Canada Geese breed in northern temperate, sub-arctic and arctic regions and nest in Canada, Alaska, and all of the lower 48 states.  They are found at a broad range of elevations, from coastal through alpine, and occupy a broad range of habitats, as long as there is water nearby. They are found in ponds, lakes, reservoirs, bays, estuaries, marshes, pastures and fields, city and suburban parks, golf courses, and grassy waterfront yards.  Canada Geese prefer riverine areas for breeding, but will nest in a wide variety of wetland habitats.  During winter and migration, Canada Geese are commonly seen in agricultural areas, foraging on grain, winter wheat, and pasture grasses.	The population and distribution of year-round residents and winter visitors is expanding throughout Washington State. Resident Canada Geese can be found year-round throughout most of Washington's lowlands in wetlands and waterways, especially in city parks and agricultural areas.  They seem to be absent from the Olympic Peninsula and the outer coast north of Grays Harbor and east of Cape Flattery to Port Angeles.  Northward migrants stop in Washington between February and March, but not generally in large numbers. Almost the entire population of the Dusky Canada Goose winters along the lower Columbia River Valley and the adjacent Willamette River Valley, including the Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge (Clark County).	Canada Geese graze while walking on land, and feed on submerged aquatic vegetation by reaching under the water with their long necks or by upending.  They are strong swimmers, flyers, and divers. During winter and migration, Canada Geese subspecies often flock together and mix with Cackling Geese; flocks may contain over 1000 birds. At migration stopover areas, disputes over food can lead to physical encounters between individuals; during fights, Canada Geese grab each other's breast or throat with their bills and land blows with their wings. Canada Geese are extremely territorial during the breeding season; males defend territories from other geese, humans, and nest predators by displays which may include lowering the head to the ground with the bill open, pumping the head up and down, and hissing.

Canada Geese are known for their honking call and most subspecies are very vocal in flight.	Canada Geese are primarily herbivores and feed on a wide variety of plants and aquatic vegetation. In winter and during migration, waste grain left in plowed fields make up the majority of their diet.  During the spring and summer, their diets include more green vegetation.  Insects, mollusks, crustaceans, and occasionally small fish are also eaten.  Urban populations of Canada Geese have adapted to grazing on domesticated grasses throughout the year. Some local populations in Washington forage on eelgrass.	Common throughout Puget Trough lowlands in wetlands, waterways, farm fields, and open spaces in cities. A few records penetrate to moderate elevation along river valleys. Surprisingly uncommon on Camano Island where only recorded once, <i>contra</i> Washington Gap predictions (Smith et al. 1997). In Kittitas County, common along Columbia River and in appropriate habitats near lakes and river valleys farther west.	Canada Geese form long-term pair bonds, generally during their second year. The female chooses the nest-site on a slightly elevated spot near water with good visibility. She then builds the nest, a shallow bowl with a slight depression, made of sticks, grass, and weeds, and lined with down. She lays and incubates 4 to 7 eggs, while the male stands guard nearby.  Incubation last approximately twenty-eight days.  Once hatched, the young leave the nest within one to two days, at which time they are able to walk, swim, feed, and dive.  Both parents lead the offspring to feeding areas, but do not provide food.  Young are able to fly within seven to nine weeks after hatching, depending on the subspecies, and remain with their parents throughout their first year.	Historically, each population of Canada Goose followed a rigid migratory corridor with traditional stopovers and wintering areas, like most other North American geese. Today, however, many urban populations are year-round residents.  Other populations have changed migratory routes and wintering areas as habitats have changed.  In Washington, migrants are usually seen along the outer coast.	canada_goose	CANG			
68	6	Branta	hutchinsii	Cackling Goose	Fairly common to common migrant, winter resident.	LC	Cackling Geese are classed as migratory game birds and, together with Canada Geese, are among the top waterfowl harvested in the US and Canada.  The conservation and management of Cackling Geese involves achieving a balance between too few geese and too many geese, and maintaining diversity of subspecies.  In Washington, one subspecies of Cackling Goose is increasing (<span class='latinname'>B.h. taverneri</span>), one is declining (<span class='latinname'>B.h. minima</span>), and a third is recovering after a decline (<span class='latinname'>B.h. leucopareia</span>). 

Cackling Geese are susceptible to lead poisoning from ingesting lead pellets in hunting areas and mortality from pesticides and other toxins.  The decline in numbers of B.h. minima may be due to sport and subsistence hunting.  Gas and oil development in the arctic may put some populations of Cackling Geese at risk. 

Because all Canada Geese and Cackling Geese subspecies look generally alike, hunters must be educated to recognize the Aleutian Cackling Goose (<span class='latinname'>B.h. leucopareia</span>), which is a protected subspecies.  Identification difficulties make it difficult to get accurate population totals of Cackling Geese.	Note: Based on differences in size, voice, breeding habitat and genetics, the American Ornithologists' Union has split Canada Goose into two species, Canada Goose (Branta canadensis) and Cackling Goose (Branta hutchinsii).   Of the eleven sub-species previously grouped under Canada Goose, the four smaller-bodied, tundra-breeding subspecies have been re-classified as Cackling Goose.

Cackling Geese appear almost identical to Canada Geese: mottled gray-brown body, black legs, tail, neck, head and face, with a white chin strap stretching from ear to ear and a white rump band. Like Canada Geese, some Cackling Geese show a white collar at the base of the neck and/or a black chin-stripe dividing the white cheek patches.  Cackling Geese are best distinguished from Canada Geese by overall body size, bill shape and size, and voice.  

Cackling Geese are generally smaller than Canada Geese, although overlap in size between the larger subspecies of Cackling Geese and the smaller subspecies of Canada Geese can make identification by size alone difficult. The smallest Cackling Geese weigh about 3 to 4 lbs. (a little larger than a mallard) with the largest subspecies weighing as much as 7 lbs., whereas Canada Geese range in size from 5 to 15 lbs. Compared to Canada Geese, Cackling Geese have proportionally smaller, stubbier bills and higher-pitched voices.

Length of neck in flight can be a useful indicator of species (shorter for Cackling Geese, longer for Canada Geese); however, because geese can elongate or retract their necks, neck length can be difficult to determine in swimming or sitting birds.  Due to their smaller size, Cackling Geese (especially B.h. minima) display a faster wingbeat than Canada Geese and their wings appear longer proportionally to their body size in flight.

Cackling Geese do not show any seasonal variation and sexes are alike, although males are slightly larger.		1	On their tundra breeding grounds, Cackling Geese are always found near water.  In winter and during migration they are found on inland lakes, rivers and marshes; in coastal salt marshes, bays and tidal flats; in brackish ponds, pastures and agricultural fields, and in grassy fields in urban and suburban parks with close proximity to water.	Migrants begin to arrive in Washington in late August but larger numbers of Cackling Geese arrive in late September, peaking from late October through late November.  Spring migration begins in late February, peaking in March through April; stragglers can be found into late May. 

On the east side of the Cascades, Cackling Geese are uncommon.  When found, they use agricultural areas and small lakes in the Columbia basin, especially Grant and Adams counties; sometimes lingering in the fields north of the Para Ponds (near Othello) during their spring migration.  In western Washington, migrants are mostly found along the outer coast although some come through the Puget Sound during fall migration, and wintering Cackling Geese are found along the Columbia River from Vancouver to Ilwaco and around Willapa Bay and GrayÃ¢??s Harbor.  Good places to look for wintering Cackling Geese in western Washington include Willapa National Wildlife Refuge (Pacific County), Julia Butler Hansen National Wildlife Refuge (Wahkiakum County) and Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge (Clark County).	Cackling Geese are primarily herbivores. The hard nail on their bill makes them efficient at grazing on grasses and plants while their long necks and the ability to tip-up enables them to forage on submerged aquatic plants.  During migration and winter, Cackling Geese are highly gregarious, feeding in large flocks; individuals and family groupings are often found in flocks with Canada Geese.  Cackling Geese become less gregarious with the approach of the breeding season as pairs leave the flock in search of nest sites. During the breeding season, they maintain their territory by threats and fights. 

Cackling Geese are strong swimmers, walkers, and fliers; they rest standing on one or both legs and often sleep on water, forming rafts.	On their tundra breeding grounds, Cackling Geese forage primarily on grasses, sedges, and berries.  Prior to fall migration, they shift their diet to include higher amounts of sedge seeds and berries in order to gain fat.  In wintering areas, Cackling Geese forage on grasses and agricultural crops, including winter wheat, alfalfa and barley.		Cackling Geese are generally monogamous, forming life-long pair bonds during their second year (they may form a new pair bond with the loss of a mate).  The various subspecies return to their traditional breeding areas year after year.  The female selects the nest site, generally a slightly elevated location with good visibility near the edge of a pond or stream, on a small island in a pond or stream, or along the arctic coastal plain.  One subspecies (<span class='latinname'>B.h. leucopareia</span>) breeds on steep slopes and cliff edges on fox-free islands in the Aleutians. Reuse of old nest sites is frequent.  The nest is constructed of material available at the site (sedges, lichens, mosses) and feathers.  The female incubates the eggs (generally 4-5) while the male stands guard. 

Goslings are precocial and leave the nest within 24 hours of hatching, at which time they are able to walk, swim, dive and feed.  The parents lead the brood to grazing areas but do not feed them.  The young fledge approximately 6-7 weeks after hatching.  The young leave the breeding areas with their parents and may remain with them throughout the first winter.	Cackling Geese are long-distance migrants, following relatively direct, traditional flight paths between their breeding grounds in the arctic and their wintering grounds in the Pacific Northwest, California, and the gulf coast of Texas. Spring migration can begin as early as late January and is prolonged by stops at traditional sites to replenish nutrients before arriving at the breeding grounds.  Fall migration begins in late August and can be non-stop or interrupted.  Cackling Geese may reverse migration and return to a previous stop along the route if they encounter unfavorable weather.   

Migrating flocks are comprised of family groups and individuals.  Flocks are variable in size, depending on the subspecies and usually fly in a V formation. Flights usually begin at dusk but may occur at any time of the day.  Migrating flocks generally fly at low elevation (300-1000 meters) and often maintain speeds of over 50 kilometers per hour for extended periods.

In winter, Cackling Geese subspecies often flock together and also mix with Canada Geese.	cackling_goose	CACG			
69	60	Bubo	scandiacus	Snowy Owl	Irregular winter resident.	LC	While there is little information available about long-term population shifts or trends, most Snowy Owl breeding areas in North America are remote from human disturbance.  Of course increased access to Arctic areas allows more shooting of owls.  Winter sightings are increasing in some areas of Washington, perhaps because of the development of large agricultural fields that attract rodents and waterfowl.	Snowy Owls are large owls with yellow eyes and no ear-tufts.  Adult males can be nearly pure white, but most have some brown mottling in their feathers.  Adult females are generally larger and darker than males; immatures have considerably more brown mottling.  In all plumages, Snowy Owls have solid white faces.  Like most owls, Snowy Owls have feathered legs and feet, but the feathers on the Snowy Owl's legs and feet are especially dense.  Snowy Owls are well camouflaged for their Arctic breeding grounds, but in winter, when they are seen in Washington, their mostly white bodies show up well against most backgrounds.		1	Snowy Owls inhabit open terrain in all seasons.  They nest above the treeline, and when they leave the tundra, they find similar treeless habitat in prairies, agricultural areas, and coastal dunes.	The Snowy Owl is an irregular winter visitor to Washington, with sightings most likely from early November to mid-March.  Abundance varies from year to year, with none reported some winters, over 100 reported in others, and at least a few most years.  Snowy Owls are most frequently seen in Whatcom County, but other coastal areas in Skagit, Grays Harbor, and Pacific Counties also host birds.  In irruptions, which seem to occur at least every 10 years, many owls can be found in coastal habitats in these locations, with smaller numbers showing up anywhere in the state.  In eastern Washington, single birds are sighted near the Potholes Reservoir and in dry wheatlands in northern Lincoln County most years.	Snowy Owls hunt both by day and by night but prefer to hunt in relatively low light.  They watch for prey from slightly elevated perches such as hummocks, rocks, and fence posts.  At times they hunt by flying low over the ground, scanning for prey, but they are generally sedentary, sitting on the same perch for extended periods.	In the far north, Snowy Owls feed almost exclusively on lemmings when they are available.  Since lemmings undergo cyclic population booms and busts, when the lemming population crashes, other small mammals such as rabbits, a variety of waterfowl, and even fish and carrion take the lemmings' place.  Snowy Owls wintering in coastal southwestern British Columbia often prey on water birds, especially Bufflehead Ducks and Horned Grebes.		Snowy Owls are mostly monogamous, though compared to most owls, the pair bond is weak, and bigamy has been recorded.  The male establishes a territory and attracts a female, which chooses the nest site.  The nest, a simple depression with no added material, is typically located on a dry raised area such as a mound, ridge, or hummock.  The female lays 3-11 eggs, depending on the abundance of prey.  Thus when lemmings are abundant, so are owls.  Snowy Owls may not nest in years when lemmings are scarce.  Eggs may be laid up to four days apart, and the female begins to incubate as soon as the first egg is laid.  The female incubates for 31-33 days, and the male brings her food while she is on the nest.  Once the young hatch, the female broods while the male continues to bring food.  Brooding lasts until the young leave the nest at about 2-3 weeks.  They young can fly at seven weeks and become independent at 9-10 weeks.	Snowy Owls are migratory, nomadic, and irruptive.  An irruption takes place after a large lemming population stimulates a high rate of reproduction.  Snowy Owls may wander in summer as well as in winter, but it is in winter that they appear in Washington State.  Wandering out of the breeding range may be associated with the dominance hierarchy, as the smallest and least dominant birds, presumably immature males, are those most likely to migrate the farthest south.  The largest birds, presumably adult females, tend to remain farther north.	snowy_owl	SNOW			
70	60	Bubo	virginianus	Great Horned Owl	Fairly common resident.	LC	Great Horned Owls are widespread and common.  They adapt well to change and are doing well in most areas.  The Breeding Bird Survey recorded a significant increase in Washington since 1966.  As more of Washington's forests are fragmented by logging, more area becomes available for Great Horned Owls, sometimes at the expense of endangered Spotted Owls, which not only require old-growth forest but also are preyed upon by Great Horned Owls.  The Spotted Owl is not the only Washington owl that has been affected by expanding Great Horned Owl populations.  In eastern Washington, Great Horned Owls displace Barn Owls in old buildings and barns.	Great Horned Owls are large, powerful owls with prominent ear-tufts, prominent facial disks, and bold yellow eyes.  Their plumage is a mix of mottled brown with white-and-black barring, with some white at the throat.  There is much variation in the darkness and shade of these colors across their range.		1	Great Horned Owls are supreme generalists.  They are found in more varied habitats than any other owl in North America.  They often use wooded habitats, especially during the breeding season when trees or heavy brush provide cover.  However they also nest in cliffs in arid areas far from trees.  Their preferred habitat is open or fragmented woodland with treeless areas nearby.	Great Horned Owls are common throughout most of Washington year round.  Two subspecies of Great Horned Owl nest in Washington, one on each side of the Cascade Mountains.	Like most owls, Great Horned Owls have keen hearing and keen vision in low light, both adaptations for hunting at night.  These aggressive and powerful hunters most commonly use a sit-and-wait approach, watching from a perch and swooping down on passing prey to seize it with their talons.	Great Horned Owls are opportunistic generalists, taking advantage of whatever prey is available.  They have the widest prey base of any North American owl.  In most places, most of their food consists of mammals such as rabbits, skunks, and large rodents.  They also eat a variety of birds, including grouse, coots, and several other species of owl. To a lesser extent, Great Horned Owls also take reptiles, amphibians, fish, and even large insects.	Widespread but uncommon in most habitats west of Cascade crest, although fairly common locally in lowlands away from densely developed urban areas. Common in open and semi-open habitats below and including ponderosa pine zone in Kittitas County, with highest densities from agriculture edge near Ellensburg. Few BBA records close to crest on either side, and absent from treeless areas at highest elevations. Does not build own nest; most often appropriates used nests from Red-tailed Hawks or occasionally Great Blue Herons. True distribution probably more extensive than indicated due to limited nocturnal survey efforts.	Great Horned Owls are early nesters and begin calling in courtship in early winter.  Monogamous pairs form long-term bonds.  Though they sometimes nest in caves or on cliff ledges, they most often nest in deciduous trees.  Great Horned Owls do not build their own nests, but use nests built by hawks, crows, magpies, herons, or other large birds.  Most are abandoned nests from previous years, but Great Horned Owls also take over active nests.  They add no new nest material.  Since nesting typically begins in late January or February, before trees begin to leaf out, Great Horned Owls on the nest can often be seen easily.  The female incubates 1-4 eggs for 30-37 days while the male brings her food.  The young remain in the nest for about 6 weeks, then climb out onto nearby branches.  They begin taking short flights at 7 weeks, and can fly well at 9-10 weeks.  Both parents feed and tend the young for several months, often as late as September or October.	Great Horned Owls are not considered migratory.  Northern birds, however, may wander long distances in the fall and winter.	great_horned_owl	GHOW			
71	8	Bubulcus	ibis	Cattle Egret	Uncommon fall, early winter visitor. One spring record.	LC	Although numbers throughout North America vary considerably from year to year, the Cattle Egret has experienced a long-term population increase and range expansion that seems to be tapering off in recent years.  Their dispersal tendencies, gregarious nature, and adaptability have all contributed to this increase.  In the 1870s and 1880s, they spread from Africa to northeastern South America.  They reached Florida in the early 1940s and began to breed there in 1953.  By 1964, they had reached the West Coast, and were breeding in southern California by 1979.  Cattle Egrets were first recorded in Washington in 1967 but have not yet bred here.  Their range expansion reached as far as Alaska in 1981.  Cattle Egrets may compete with native species for nest sites in some areas, but in general, their impact on native species is considered minimal.  In many areas they are considered beneficial as they may help control parasitic flies and other insect pests, improving cattle health.  Their cosmopolitan nature, however, may be a health threat as they can spread disease to new areas.	The Cattle Egret is a small heron, usually found near grazing mammals.  Only half the size of a Great Egret, the Cattle Egret's size is a useful field mark.  Juveniles and adults in non-breeding plumage are pure white with dark legs.  Adults have yellow bills.  The juvenile's bill is dark but turns yellow by its first fall.  Adults in breeding plumage are unmistakable, with buff-colored plumes creating patches on the back, breast, and crest.  Breeding adults also have orange bills and reddish-orange legs.		1	The Cattle Egret's feeding habitat is open country, where it is most often found associated with cattle (in North America).  In other countries, it is found near a variety of large grazers.  Breeding habitat is similar to that of other herons and egrets, in colonies near the water, often in a swamp or on an island.	There have been only a few records of Cattle Egret's occurance in Washington during the breeding season, with records from Skagit and Pacific Counties in 1995 and Clark County in 1997. In 2002, two birds were seen at Burbank in Walla Walla County from mid-May to mid-June. There are no records of actual breeding. In the fall in most years, a few Cattle Egrets can be found on the coast of Washington, in Puget Sound, and in eastern Washington.	Although a gregarious bird at all seasons, the Cattle Egret is at the edge of its range in Washington and so is usually found here alone or in small groups. Cattle Egrets follow cattle and other grazers to take advantage of the insects stirred up in their wake.	The Cattle Egret eats mainly insects, especially grasshoppers, and in some parts of the world, parasitic flies.  An adaptable species, they have been known to eat nestling birds and eggs, and to scavenge in dumps.		Cattle Egrets typically first breed at two years old.  They nest in colonies with other heron and egret species.  The male displays within his territory to attract a mate who then joins him on the territory.  Occasionally the male has more than one female on his territory, but that is more common at the beginning of the breeding season.  The pair bond lasts for the duration of the nesting season, but birds do not appear to re-pair with the same mates the following year.  Once paired, the male brings nest material to the female, who builds the stick nest in a tree or shrub.  Often live twigs with leaves are broken off and added to the nest.  Both parents incubate the 3-4 eggs for about 24 days.  Both regurgitate food for the young.  Cattle Egrets are very attentive parents, and one of the parents is almost constantly with the young for the first 10 days.  After about three weeks, the young start climbing around the nest, and first flight is around 4 weeks.  The young become independent at about 6 ½ weeks, are strong flyers, and are able to disperse long distances.	Migration in the fall and spring is prolonged, lasting from February through May and September through November.  Once they fledge, young birds wander long distances in random directions.  The long-distance dispersal of juveniles from July through November is what typically brings Cattle Egrets to Washington, and is responsible for their impressive colonization of new areas.	cattle_egret				
72	6	Bucephala	albeola	Bufflehead	Common winter. Rare breeder east.	LC	Buffleheads are among the few species of ducks whose numbers have dramatically increased since the mid-1950s when over-hunting was a significant factor. Protection from and regulation of hunting have helped these birds. Habitat degradation, on the other hand, has eliminated nesting habitat. The tendency of females to return to the areas where they were hatched makes it difficult to repopulate an area once a population is gone. Populating a new area is similarly difficult.	Washington's smallest diving duck, the Bufflehead, is easily distinguished from other ducks. The male has a white underside and a dark back that appears black, but upon closer inspection, is actually a deep iridescent greenish-purple. At the back of the black head is a wedge of white. This mark distinguishes the Bufflehead from the larger goldeneyes, which have white in front of their eyes. The smaller female is a drab, brownish, dusty-black with white ear- and wing-patches.		1	Buffleheads' breeding habitat is small lakes and ponds in boreal forests with nearby stands of poplar and aspen. In the winter, they are most often found in coastal areas in shallow bays and inlets.	In winter, densities of Bufflehead are high in sheltered bays and inlets throughout the state's coastal areas. They also winter on fresh water in smaller numbers. In the breeding season, they rarely breed in the northeastern corner of the state. They have recently been recorded breeding at Big Meadow Lake (Pend Orielle County), and the Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge (Spokane County). Washington is at the southwestern edge of their breeding range, but non-breeders can be spotted in the summer throughout the state.	Aggressive and monogamous during the breeding season, Buffleheads sometimes keep the same mate, and often the same nest, for several years. Females almost always return to their hatch-sites to breed. Territorial disputes between females with young often end up with the winning female going away with more or perhaps all of the young. Buffleheads have numerous elaborate courtship displays that they perform throughout the year, except during the post-breeding molt and in the early fall.	When nesting, Buffleheads eat mostly insect larvae and other invertebrates. In winter, their diet shifts to crustaceans and mollusks. They dive and swallow their prey under water.		Buffleheads nested historically in abandoned flicker holes, which are too small for other cavity-nesting ducks. They now also nest in man-made boxes. Nests are located within 25 yards of the water and from 2 to 42 feet above the ground. The female uses enough down to cover the eggs but adds no other material. She lays a median of 9 eggs, which she incubates alone. Once the young hatch, the female continues to care for them, although they are able to feed themselves almost immediately.	Birds found in Washington in winter come from many western breeding areas. The birds arrive in Washington in late October to early November. Like many ducks, Buffleheads migrate at night.	bufflehead	BUFF			
73	6	Bucephala	clangula	Common Goldeneye	Common winter. Rare breeder east.	LC	Common Goldeneyes are more numerous and widespread than Barrow's Goldeneyes. The population appears stable, and numbers have increased in some areas where nest boxes have been provided. Common Goldeneyes have recently begun to take advantage of northern areas with industrial effluent discharge, which keeps the water free of ice in areas that are typically frozen in the winter. The concentration of birds at these sites is of concern since contamination from the effluent is highly possible. Another characteristic of Common Goldeneyes is their tendency to prefer acidified water. Many acid-tolerant insects provide plentiful prey, and most fish cannot live in these highly acid environments, thus reducing competition. Common Goldeneyes' use of these disturbed environments is of concern because of the possible short- and long-term effects of toxins that may also be found in these areas. The cavity-nesting nature of this species makes it vulnerable to logging and other habitat destruction that eliminate natural cavities. Their productivity is relatively low for waterfowl, and their strong fidelity to natal sites makes them slow to colonize new areas, resulting in a population that may be slow to rebound from decreases.	Often found in large rafts outside the breeding season, Common Goldeneyes are frequent winter residents in Puget Sound and on large Washington rivers. The male Common Goldeneye has a dark iridescent-green head that looks black when not in the sun. He also has a prominent round or oval white spot on each side of his face at the base of his black bill. His belly and flanks are white, and his rump is black. His back is mostly white with black bars. The female Common Goldeneye has a gray body, brown head, and yellow eyes. This bird can be very difficult to distinguish from a female Barrow's Goldeneye. The bill of the Common Goldeneye is mostly black with a yellow tip, while that of the Barrow's is mostly yellow. Juveniles are gray with brownish heads, similar to females but with less differentiation between the head and body colors. Consult a field guide or an experienced observer, consider range and habitat, and study nearby males for clues about which female and juvenile goldeneyes might be present.		1	Common Goldeneyes breed worldwide in northern boreal forests. They prefer clear water in small lakes and ponds that are not overwhelmed with submergent and emergent vegetation and which do not support populations of fish. Goldeneyes are cavity-nesting ducks and generally require forested habitat with mature trees (deciduous or coniferous) that offer suitable nesting cavities. During migration, goldeneyes stop on large lakes and rivers to feed while they move between breeding and wintering habitats. They winter primarily in marine areas, in shallow protected bays, estuaries, and large lakes with a sandy, gravel, or rocky substrate. They are occasionally found on sewage lagoons, and non-breeding birds sometimes summer in these areas.	Common Goldeneyes are among the least common breeding ducks in Washington, found nesting only in the northeastern portion of the state, with most birds nesting in north-central and northeastern Canada. From November to April, however, Common Goldeneyes are fairly common on both fresh water and calm salt water in both the eastern and western lowlands. It is one of the most common wintering diving ducks throughout much of Puget Sound, and can be found in large concentrations in the sound and along the Columbia and Snake Rivers.	Common Goldeneyes are diving ducks and forage mostly under water. Often a whole group of goldeneyes will dive at the same time.  Goldeneyes are aggressive and territorial, and the male performs spectacular and complex courtship displays. The female commonly lays eggs in the nests of other Common Goldeneyes and other ducks, especially other cavity-nesting ducks.	On the breeding grounds, aquatic insects make up the bulk of the diet, and in fact, goldeneyes prefer ponds that lack insect-eating fish which compete for prey. On wintering grounds, mollusks, crustaceans, and fish are the main foods.		Female Common Goldeneyes do not usually start breeding until the age of two years, but yearlings may prospect for future nest sites. Females typically return to the areas where they hatched (philopatry), and once they breed, often return to the same nesting site year after year. Pairs form in late winter or early spring. Nests are located in cavities in large trees, 5 to 60 feet above the ground. Cavities are often old Pileated Woodpecker holes, natural cavities made from torn branches, or artificial nest boxes. The nest itself is a depression in existing material (wood chips, leaves, or material from a previous nest) lined with down. The female typically lays 7 to 10 eggs and incubates them for 28 to 32 days. After one or two weeks of incubation, the pair bond dissolves, and the male begins his molt migration. It is not known whether these pair bonds re-form in the fall, but other sea ducks, including Barrow's Goldeneyes, do re-pair, so it is quite possible that Common Goldeneyes do as well. The young leave the nest one to two days after hatching, and the female leads them to areas with abundant food where they feed themselves. Broods will sometimes join other broods in a large crèche. This most often occurs if the female has abandoned a brood early, or if broods are mixed up during territorial disputes between females. Females abandon the young before they can fly, usually at 5 to 6 weeks of age, but occasionally earlier. The young fledge at 8 to 9 weeks of age.	After incubation begins, the males undergo a molt migration, which is usually a short distance and often in a northerly direction to larger lakes, bays, and rivers. Then, late in the fall, they migrate medium distances from these staging areas to the wintering grounds, often not arriving until late October or early November. Males winter farther north than females, often as far north as there is open water. Goldeneyes leave for the breeding areas in late February.	common_goldeneye	COGO			
74	6	Bucephala	islandica	Barrow's Goldeneye	Fairly common winter. Fairly common breeder.	LC	The Barrow's is the least numerous of the two species of goldeneyes and is more restricted in range than the Common Goldeneye. Numbers appear to be stable, but there is some question about whether current surveying techniques are adequate for this species. Low productivity and strong site-fidelity make them slow to rebound from decreases. Oil spills on wintering areas, heavy metal accumulation in prey, recreational development on nesting lakes, and loss of habitat from logging are all potential threats. The population on the Pacific coast makes up 90% of the world population, increasing the significance of local threats to the population as a whole.	Female Barrow's Goldeneyes have gray bodies, brown heads, and yellow eyes. They can be very difficult to distinguish from the female Common Goldeneyes. The bill of the female Common Goldeneye is larger and mostly black with a yellow tip, while the Barrow's bill is smaller and mostly yellow. Male Barrow's Goldeneyes have iridescent purple heads that look black when not in the sun, and prominent, crescent-shaped white spots on each side of the head at the base of the bill. Their bellies and flanks are white, and their rumps are black. Their backs are mostly black with white spots. Their bills are solid black. Juveniles are mostly gray with brownish heads similar to females, but with less differentiation between the head and body colors. Consult a field guide or an experienced observer; consider range and habitat; and study nearby males to help determine which species is present.		1	The Barrow's Goldeneye is primarily a bird of the western mountain region of North America. It nests farther north than the Common Goldeneye, and in some cases even north of the tree line. The Barrow's Goldeneye prefers small, clear lakes and ponds that are not crowded with submergent and emergent vegetation and that do not support populations of fish. Goldeneyes are cavity-nesting ducks and typically use forested habitat with mature trees (deciduous or coniferous) that offer suitable nesting cavities. They have also been known to nest in other areas as well (see Nesting). During migration, goldeneyes stop to feed on large lakes and rivers. During winter they often frequent marine areas in shallow protected bays, estuaries, and large lakes with a sandy, gravel, or rocky substrate.	As a breeder, the Barrow's Goldeneye is more numerous than the Common Goldeneye, found on large ponds, lakes, and reservoirs at mid- and higher elevations in the Cascades, the Okanogan and Methow Valleys, and the mountains and river valleys in the northeastern corner of the state. They are not found breeding in the Blue Mountains or the Olympics. A unique breeding population occurs in the Columbia Basin at Lake Lenore in Grant County. This population nests in cliff cavities rather than trees. In winter, Barrow's Goldeneyes are uncommon to fairly common east of the Cascades on fresh water. They are common in Puget Sound, especially at the southern end of the sound, and in coastal bays and estuaries. They are typically found much closer to shore than Common Goldeneyes.	Barrow's Goldeneyes are diving ducks, and whole groups of goldeneyes will dive at the same time. They forage around pilings, and most of their foraging is under water.  Barrow's Goldeneyes are aggressive and territorial, even more so than Common Goldeneyes. Males will defend territories, and females will defend areas around their broods excluding their own and other species. The males exhibit spectacular and complex courtship displays. Females commonly lay eggs in the nests of both other Barrow's Goldeneyes and other ducks, especially other cavity-nesting ducks.	In the breeding season, aquatic insects make up the bulk of the diet, and in fact, Barrow's Goldeneyes prefer ponds that lack insect-eating fish that compete for prey. In winter, mollusks, crustaceans, fish, and occasionally fish eggs are their main foods.	Uncommon in larger ponds, lakes, and reservoirs at moderate and higher elevations in eastern King and western Kittitas Counties. Records predominantly from Kittitas County side of crest. Generally prefers montane and subalpine lakes in forested habitats; requires cavities for nesting. Limited access to high-elevation ponds has probably led to underrepresentation of this species in BBA surveys of its core breeding area.	Many female Barrow's Goldeneyes don't start breeding until the age of three years, but younger females may prospect for future nest sites. Females typically return to the areas where they hatched, and once they begin to breed, often return to the same nesting site year after year. Pairs form in late winter or early spring. Nests are typically located in cavities in large trees or nest boxes, although Barrow's Goldeneyes have been known to nest in rock crevices, abandoned buildings, burrows, or in bushes on the ground when trees aren't available. The nest itself is a depression in existing material (wood chips, leaves, or material from a previous nest), lined with down. The female typically lays 6 to 12 eggs and incubates them for 29 to 31 days. After incubation has begun, the pair bond dissolves and the male begins his molt migration. The long-term pair bond is re-established in the fall. The young leave the nest one to two days after hatching, and the female leads them to an area with abundant food where they feed themselves. Broods sometimes join other broods and create large crèches. This most often occurs if a brood has been abandoned early by the female, or if broods are mixed up during territorial disputes between females. Females abandon the young before they can fly, usually at 5 to 6 weeks of age, but occasionally earlier. The young fledge at 8 to 9 weeks of age.	After incubation begins, the males undergo a molt migration. Then, late in the fall, they migrate medium distances from these staging areas to the wintering grounds, often not arriving until late October or early November. Males usually arrive a few weeks ahead of the females and the young. In spring, Barrow's Goldeneyes head for the breeding areas in late February.	barrows_goldeneye	BAGO			
75	1	Buteo	jamaicensis	Red-tailed Hawk	Common resident.	LC	Red-tailed Hawks are the most common and widespread hawk in North America. Red-tail numbers have increased significantly as a result of forest fragmentation that creates the mosaic of interspersed wooded and open areas they prefer. In some areas, this increase has been at the expense of Red-shouldered, Ferruginous, and Swainson's Hawks. Harlan's Red-tailed Hawks seem to have increased in number.	Red-tailed Hawks, especially in the West, have highly variable plumage, including dark and rufous phases. They have long, broad wings and short, wide tails. Most have light breasts and dark streaks forming a mottled 'belly-band.' Most have dark brown heads. The underwings are mottled dark and light. All plumages of Red-tailed Hawks have a darkish band on the leading edges of the inner underwings, known as the 'patagial' markings. The upper side of the tail of most adult birds is deep rufous, although the Harlan's Red-tailed Hawk, a subspecies occasionally seen in Washington, has a light gray or banded tail. Light birds often have a faint white 'V' on their back-feathers that can be seen when they are perched. Juveniles lack the red tail.		1	Red-tailed Hawks are found in almost every type of habitat, as long as there are open areas interspersed with patches of trees or other elevated perches. They can often be seen perched in trees or on poles near open fields or agricultural areas, and along roads.	Red-tailed Hawks can be found year round throughout most of Washington, including in developed areas such as the city of Seattle. One species, the Harlan's Red-tailed Hawk, winters regularly in small numbers near Bellingham (Whatcom County) and is found regularly in Skagit and Snohomish Counties, but rarely in other areas either side of the Cascades.	Red-tailed Hawks are adapted for soaring and will spend long periods riding thermals, looking for prey or migrating. They also use a sit-and-wait style of hunting, scanning for prey from high perches. They are commonly seen along roadsides or soaring over open fields.	Red-tailed Hawks eat many small mammals, especially rodents and rabbits. Birds, reptiles, and sometimes fish or large insects all fall prey to Red-tailed Hawks on occasion. They have also been known to steal prey from other raptors and to eat fresh carrion.	Common and widespread throughout most low- and mid-elevation habitats, apparently shunning only dense forest. Does not breed in subalpine parkland (Smith et al. 1997), although BBA records in King and Kittitas Counties extend across Cascade crest where below tree line. Found in farmlands, meadows, open forests, wetlands, industrial zones, and low-density residential areas. Nests along I-5 corridor south of Seattle but absent north to county line, possibly due to higher crow densities there. Most residents light-morph, but rufous- and dark-morph birds occur in small numbers.	Red-tailed Hawks are monogamous and may remain paired throughout the year. At the beginning of the breeding season, they perform impressive aerial courtship flights, accompanied by shrill screams. The nest is built in a tall tree, often the tallest tree in a cluster, or on cliff ledges, towers, nest platforms, and occasionally buildings. In western Washington, the nest is usually in a hardwood tree, especially black cottonwood or red alder. Both sexes help build the nest, a bulky collection of sticks lined with bark and other fine material. Greenery is often added. Both help incubate the 2 to 3 eggs for 28 to 32 days. The female stays on the nest and broods the young for the first 30 to 35 days after they hatch. During this time the male brings food, which the female tears up and feeds to the young. At 42 to 46 days, the young leave the nest, but can't fly for another 2 to 3 weeks. The majority of juveniles don't start catching their own food until 6 to 7 weeks after they leave the nest, although some start sooner. Some juveniles may continue to associate with their parents for up to six months after they leave the nest.	Most Red-tailed Hawks at the northern extent of their range (mostly in Canada and the northern Great Plains) migrate, while the rest of the population, including Washington's breeders, is resident. Those that migrate do so late in the fall and early in the spring, and typically winter throughout the United States and northern Mexico.	red-tailed_hawk	RTHA			
76	1	Buteo	lagopus	Rough-legged Hawk	Fairly common winter resident.	LC	Rough-legged Hawk populations vary considerably from year to year, following the population cycles of their lemming prey. These fluctuations make it difficult to assess trends, but Christmas Bird Count data reflect an increase throughout the Northwest over the past 30 years, and the population appears to be healthy.	This winter visitor is a large, soaring hawk named for the feathers that extend down its legs, an adaptation to its northern habitat. Rough-legged Hawks are variable in plumage, with light and dark color phases and variations in between. Dark phases account for only ten percent of western Rough-legged Hawks. Adults are generally mottled light-and-dark underneath, with dark patches at the wrists. Seen from below, the tails of both phases appear light with a dark terminal band. Seen from above, both phases appear mostly dark, but the light phase shows a light tail with a dark terminal band, and the tail of the dark phase appears dark all over. The adult male can have several dark bands at the tip of its tail as compared to the female, which only has one band. The light phase has a distinctive light-colored head, in contrast to its dark upperside. The Rough-legged Hawk's bill and feet are relatively small.		1	Rough-legged Hawks nest in the Arctic, both in the Old and the New World, mostly in tundra. They also use the northern edge of boreal forest. In winter, they inhabit open fields, plains, marshes, and farmland.	Every winter Rough-legged Hawks move into eastern and western Washington, and can be found in many large, open habitats. During migration, they can also be seen in the mountains. A few southbound birds are seen as early as mid-August, but they are not common until mid-October. By mid-April they are uncommon, and are not generally seen in Washington after the end of April. Numbers vary greatly from year to year due to prey availability.	They are usually found singly or in pairs; only rarely are they seen in large groups. They hunt by watching from a perch. Because of their small feet, they are able to stand on a thin perch. They patrol low over the ground, or hover high over a field, watching for movement, then swooping down, talons first, to grab prey.	On the breeding grounds of the Rough-legged Hawk, lemmings are an important food source. Voles, mice, ground squirrels, and other small mammals are part of the diet at other times of the year. They have also been known to eat carrion, especially in the winter.		Nests are built on cliffs, slopes, atop large rocks, or on the ground, or, when there are trees nearby, in a tree. The bulky nest is made of sticks, bones, and other debris, lined with twigs, grass, and other fine material. The female incubates the 3 to 5 eggs for 31 days while the male brings her food. The female broods the young, and the male continues to provide them all with food. After a few weeks, the female joins in the hunting. The young first begin to fly at 5 to 6 weeks of age, but remain with the adults for another 3 to 5 weeks.	Birds leave their Arctic breeding grounds in late fall, with only a few migrating farther south than the central United States.  Migrants come to Washington from points north, usually from early October throughout November. The birds return to the Arctic early in spring.	rough-legged_hawk				
77	1	Buteo	lineatus	Red-shouldered Hawk		LC		Expanding northward from Oregon. Rare in winter in lowlands in southwestern Washington; annual for the last decade at Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge (Clark County); probably increasing elsewhere along lower Columbia River. Scattered recent records both north and east from there.		1								red-shouldered_hawk				
78	1	Buteo	platypterus	Broad-winged Hawk		LC		Casual migrant east and west, especially fall.		1								broad-winged_hawk				
79	1	Buteo	regalis	Ferruginous Hawk	Uncommon summer resident east.	LC	Ferruginous Hawks have declined in recent years across North America, including in Washington, which is at the extreme western edge of the range. They are listed by the federal government as a species of concern and by the state of Washington as threatened; they are included on both the Audubon~Washington and Washington Gap Analysis at-risk lists. Threats to the population in Washington include increased human disturbance and habitat destruction, as shrub-steppe is one of the most threatened ecosystems in Washington at this time. The Conservation Reserve Program and other shrub-steppe conservation programs may help protect and restore habitat for Ferruginous Hawks. The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife has constructed nest platforms to facilitate nesting, although more than this may be needed to protect the estimated 4,000 pairs range-wide, with fewer than 50 pairs remaining in Washington.	The Ferruginous Hawk, generally seen in eastern Washington, is the largest of Washington's hawks.  This hawk can be seen soaring with its wings in a shallow dihedral. The Ferruginous Hawk has a light and a dark color phase. The dark phase is less common; 25% of the birds nesting near Hanford are the dark phase. The light-phase adult has a rufous back, gray and white wings, and a light rufous tail with white at the base. The head is streaked with light gray. The breast and belly are solid white, contrasting sharply with the rufous feathering on the legs. The flight feathers appear mostly white from below, the interiors of the wings are rufous and white, and the tail is white. Light-phase juveniles have similar patterning although the rufous color is a duller brown. Juveniles are lighter underneath overall and do not have the dark leg-feathering of adults. Dark phase birds are dark overall, except for the white feathers on the wings and tail.		1	Ferruginous Hawks inhabit dry, open country of the plains, prairies, grassland, shrub-steppe, and deserts, especially in those areas with native bunchgrasses.  Compared to the Swainson's Hawk, another raptor of the prairies, the Ferruginous Hawk occurs in drier habitat and is more likely to nest on utility towers, nest platforms, or cliff ledges. They winter in open areas as well, especially in agricultural fields.	Uncommon in Washington, Ferruginous Hawks occur in the greatest concentration in Franklin and Benton Counties. They are also seen rarely in other areas of the shrub-steppe zone. They are generally seen from mid-March through August, but are occasionally spotted in the winter in the lower Columbia Basin.	Various techniques are used for hunting, including soaring, hovering over open areas, and watching from a perch. The hawks also capture prey by waiting on the ground at burrow entrances, sometimes in groups.  In courtship, both sexes soar in a circular pattern at high altitudes, during which time the male dives and ascends in a sky dance accompanied by loud vocalizations.  The pair may grasp beaks, interlocking talons while spiraling toward the ground.	Ferruginous Hawks' prey consists primarily of squirrels, jackrabbits, pocket gophers, (and in some states, prairie dogs).  They will feed on snakes and other small animals, if available.	Records generalized to full township/ranges; true population density thus much thinner than symbolized. Shrub steppe-denizen extremely rare in Kittitas County, marginally eligible for inclusion. Only breeding confirmation in atlas period dates to pre-1990 in vicinity of Lmuma Creek. Other mapped records, from March, probably represent migrants. Nests on cliffs, bluffs, man-made structures, and trees. Core Washington population near Tri-Cities continues in severe decline. Nested historically in Kittitas County although never numerous (Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife 1996); has apparently withdrawn concurrent with statewide decline, possibly due to preference for lower-elevation nest sites (J. Watson, pers.comm.).	Nests are generally on the ground, on rock outcrops or cliff faces, in trees, or on utility towers or nest platforms. Both members of the monogamous pair help build the nest; the male collects nesting material and the female arranges it in the nest. Outside of Washington, Ferruginous Hawk nests historically included bison bones and were lined with bison dung and hair. Now they are made mostly of sticks and lined with a variety of material, including cow dung. Nests are often reused and added to from year to year. The female incubates the 2 to 4 eggs for 32 to 33 days. The male brings food to the female and may help incubate the eggs.  The female broods the young for about three weeks. The male brings food to the nest, and the female tears it up and feeds it to the young. The young begin to fly at 40 to 50 days. They usually depend on their parents for food for another few weeks but rarely return to the nest.	The Washington population of Ferruginous Hawks is migratory, with the majority of birds leaving, although some may stay. They return by early March, and adults may leave as early as July.  Juveniles may stay until August. Some birds fly east to the eastern front of the Rockies to exploit ground squirrel populations before moving on to the southern Plains states or California. A joint study by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and the Woodland Park Zoo is currently under way to track Ferruginous Hawks by satellite in order to better understand their migration routes.	ferruginous_hawk				
80	1	Buteo	swainsoni	Swainson's Hawk	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	Although they prey on agricultural pests, Swainson's Hawks were formerly presumed to be pests themselves and were killed by farmers and ranchers. With attitudes towards predators changing, this is less of a problem, but habitat destruction and pesticides still pose threats to the Swainson's Hawk population. In the mid-1990s, thousands of Swainson's Hawks were killed on their wintering grounds from direct pesticide spraying, and by eating pesticide-covered grasshoppers. This particular pesticide has since been removed from use. As agricultural practices become more intensive, available habitat shrinks, and there is some evidence that the population is declining in Washington. For these reasons, the Swainson's Hawk is listed on the Audubon watch list for Washington.	The Swainson's Hawk is a slender buteo, similar in length to the Red-tailed Hawk, but with a longer wingspan and weighing about 20% less. The pointed wings are held in a strong dihedral in flight. There are three different color phases, light, dark, and intermediate (or rufous), all of which occur in Washington. Pairs are often of mixed color phases. Light-phase adults have a white or mostly white belly, with matching underwings. They have rufous breasts, or bibs, that contrast sharply with their white bellies. The head is dark with white surrounding the bill, extending down to the throat and up to the eyes. The back is solid dark brown. Dark adults are almost solid dark brown with rufous on the belly and underwings.  Intermediate plumages fall along a continuum between dark and light phases. All adults have dark flight feathers. Juveniles are generally mottled versions of the adults, with the juvenile of the light phase having a fairly white head at times.		1	Swainson's Hawks forage in open farmland, sagebrush desert, or prairies. Compared to Ferruginous Hawks, Swainson's inhabit moister areas. They nest in wooded groves along streams, windbreaks, or other treed or brushy areas near open habitats, often building nests in introduced locust or cottonwood trees. During migration they are often found in grasslands and harvested fields.	Swainson's Hawks are fairly common summer residents in higher grasslands in most of eastern Washington. Most arrive by mid-April and leave in late August or early September. During migration they are sometimes seen in the Cascade Mountains.	During migration, Swainson's Hawks often stop over at recently tilled fields, where insect larvae have been brought to the surface by plowing. In these instances, large flocks can be seen foraging on the ground. They also hunt by soaring over open areas, scanning the ground for prey. They have been known to congregate at the leading edge of a grassfire, waiting for prey to be driven into the open by the oncoming flames.	During the breeding season, Swainson's Hawks eat many small mammals. In Washington, almost 90% of their diet is made up of ground squirrels. During migration and winter, however, they are almost exclusively insectivorous, with grasshoppers and dragonflies both major components of their diet.	Uncommon in steppe zone of southeastern Kittitas County, at western edge of species' Washington range. Utilizes agricultural fields and shrub-steppe with a few records from as far west as Ellensburg. Outlying late-May record from Skookumchuck drainage may represent late migrant. Perhaps due to propensity for feeding on invertebrates, Swainson's Hawk has adapted very well to agricultural practices. Nests near riparian areas and in windbreaks. BBA records do not support predicted range mapped by Washington Gap report north and west of Ellensburg or on Columbia River slope (Smith et al.1997).	Swainson's Hawks nest later than any other raptors in Washington. Courtship begins when they arrive on the breeding grounds.  The male Swainson's Hawk makes steep display flights. Both members of the monogamous pair help with nest building, although the male does most of the work. The nest is usually in a tree or shrub from 15-30 feet off the ground, often on top of an old magpie or crow nest, although it can be on a ledge. The nest itself is a platform made of sticks and lined with finer material, often including greenery. The female incubates 2 to 3 eggs for 34 to 35 days. The male brings her food while she is incubating and may take short stints at the nest when she leaves to feed. The female broods the young for about nine days, after which she helps the male provide food. The young birds begin climbing about on tree limbs near the nest at 27 to 33 days, and take their first flights at about 38 to 46 days. Once they begin to fly, the young stay near the nest for 11 to 20 more days.	Swainson's Hawks are long-distance migrants, some traveling more than 6,000 miles each way. They often migrate in large flocks and spend the winter in the native grasslands and agricultural areas of southern Argentina.	swainsons_hawk				
81	8	Butorides	virescens	Green Heron	Uncommon breeder. Rare winter.	LC	The nationwide population of Green Herons appears stable, but estimating numbers is difficult due to their secretive nature.  They were first reported in Washington in 1939.  The first nests in this state were discovered in 1960, and their range appears to be expanding in this region.  Numbers in eastern Washington may be increasing.  Threats to the population include predator control at fish hatcheries and disturbance during the nesting season.  Pesticides appear to be less of a threat for Green Herons than for other heron species. As is the case with most wetland species, habitat loss and degradation are the primary concerns to the population.  For Green Herons, protection of small wetlands is especially important.	A solitary and secretive bird, the Green Heron is stocky, dark colored, and small for a heron.  The adult Green Heron has a dark rufous neck, gray belly, and dark, iridescent, greenish-blue back.  The upper mandible of the bill is dark, and the legs are bright orange.  The juvenile has a brown-and-white streaked neck, slight crest on its dark head, and prominently light-tipped wing coverts.  Yellow spectacle-shaped markings surround the eye and extend to the bridge of the bill.  These markings are present, but less pronounced, in the adult.		1	Green Herons inhabit small, freshwater wetlands, ponds, and stream-sides with thick vegetation at their margins.  In winter, they frequent coastal areas and mangrove swamps.	Green Herons are uncommon to fairly common, but local, at low elevations in western Washington from April through October.  The birds that winter in Washington are seen rarely, from November to March, in the southwestern part of the state, up to the southern tip of Puget Sound, and along the coast.  They are rare in eastern Washington.	The solitary Green Heron usually forages from a perch, where it stands with its body lowered and stretched out horizontally, ready to thrust its bill at unsuspecting prey.  One of the few birds known to use tools, the Green Heron will attract prey with bait (feathers, small sticks, or berries) that it drops into the water.  When out in the open, it commonly flicks its tail nervously and raises and lowers its crest.  Another characteristic behavior of the Green Heron, which may help with identification, is its tendency to fly away from a disturbance giving a squawk and defecating in a white stream behind itself. (Other small herons defecate forward.)  When alarmed, the Green Heron may adopt the classic bittern stance, with head held vertical, looking across the base of its bill. The Green Heron commonly calls in flight--a sharp skeow or kyow sound.	Fish are the primary food of this opportunistic feeder.  Crayfish and other crustaceans are also a source of food, as are aquatic insects, frogs, grasshoppers, snakes, and rodents.	Uncommon but fairly widespread and increasing in freshwater wetlands of lowland King County, including urban areas. Less common in Kitsap County, seldom seen in Island County. No BBA records for Kittitas County and not projected to breed there by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Nests in trees, usually near water.	Green Herons typically nest in trees near the water.  Males stake out territories and call to attract females.  Sometimes pairs form in migration, and the pair will select the site together.  Unlike most herons, the Green Heron does not typically nest in large colonies.  The male starts the nest, bringing long, thin sticks to the female who finishes the nest.  Both parents incubate the 3 to 5 eggs for about 19 to 21 days.  Once the young hatch, both parents feed them by regurgitating food.  Both help brood the young for about three weeks.  At about 16 to 17 days, the young climb about near the nest, and they first start to fly at 21 to 23 days.  The parents continue to feed the young for a few more weeks until they fledge after about 30 to 35 days.	Most of the Green Herons that breed in Washington, like other Green Herons in all but the southernmost US, withdraw to the south in winter, leaving in late August or early September.  Small numbers of wintering birds remain in the region.  Post-breeding wandering is not uncommon.	green_heron	GRHE			
82	42	Calamospiza	melanocorys	Lark Bunting		LC		Casual spring and fall migrant, mostly in southeastern Washington or along the coasts.		1								lark_bunting				
83	10	Calcarius	lapponicus	Lapland Longspur	Uncommon migrant. Rare winter.	LC	While not very common in Washington, range-wide the Lapland Longspur is one of the most abundant breeding birds of the far north.  Large yearly fluctuations make it difficult to assess population trends, but much of their breeding range is remote from human disturbance.  Potential disturbance in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge could be a threat to the Lapland Longspur population.	The Lapland Longspur is a streaked bird, larger than most sparrows.  Unlike many sparrows, which normally have unstreaked rumps and tails, the Lapland Longspur has streaks that extend from the back down to the tip of the tail.  The male's summer plumage is distinctive--a bold black face, crown, and throat, straw-colored bill, and white brow-line that curves down around in front of his wing.  Females and males in non-breeding plumage look similar; they are streaky overall with chestnut on the wings and cheeks edged in black.  All plumages have white outer tail feathers.  The chestnut nape, visible in all adult plumages, is a good field mark, as well.  Unlike most birds with different breeding and non-breeding plumages, longspurs molt only once a year.  In the fall, they molt into non-breeding plumage.  By spring, the outer tips of the feathers have worn off to reveal the breeding plumage underneath.		1	Lapland Longspurs breed in the high Arctic in a variety of tundra habitats.  They prefer wet tundra, thickly vegetated upland areas, sedge-lined stream and pond edges, and sedge marshes.  During migration and in winter, they frequent prairies, pastures, and grassy beaches.	Lapland Longspurs are an uncommon winter visitor to Washington.  During winter, they can often be found in northern Puget Sound and along the outer coast, and in open prairie of central and southeastern Washington.  Mid-September is one of the best times to find migrating Lapland Longspurs, especially in open, grassy areas near Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County) and Willapa Bay (Pacific County), along the outer coast.  They can also be seen moving through the state on their northward migration in April and sometimes into May.	Lapland Longspurs are known for forming huge flocks, but in Washington, flocks typically number only 10-50 birds, and single birds are often recorded.  They sometimes flock with Horned Larks, Snow Buntings, and American Pipits.  When flushed, these ground-foragers will fly a long distance away from the disturbance.	Seeds and arthropods make up the Lapland Longspur's diet.  During the summer, arthropods make up about half their diet, although the young longspurs eat a far greater proportion.  In winter, seeds are an important diet component.  In agricultural areas, they consume waste grain in great quantities as well.		Males arrive on the breeding grounds before the females and start to defend and advertise territories.  They sing in flight, on the ground, or from a perch (usually a tall weed or wire in their treeless nesting habitat).  Once the females arrive, pairing and nesting occurs quickly, as the season is short in these far-northern breeding grounds.  The nest, built by the female, is on the ground, usually by a small hummock of sedge, grass, or moss.  It is an open cup made from coarse sedge, lined with fine sedge and grass, feathers, or hair.  The female incubates the 4 to 6 eggs alone for 10 to 14 days.  Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest at 8 to 10 days of age.	In late fall, Lapland Longspurs migrate in flocks to their wintering grounds across the middle and northern United States, including Washington.  They return to the Arctic in the early spring.  Peak passage is in November and March.	lapland_longspur				
84	10	Calcarius	ornatus	Chestnut-collared Longspur		NT		Casual spring and fall migrant.		1								chestnut-collared_longspur				
85	57	Calidris	acuminata	Sharp-tailed Sandpiper	Rare fall migrant, mostly coast.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the worldwide population at 166,000 birds, with 1,000 birds traveling down the Pacific Coast south of Alaska each year.  Because such a small percentage of the population ever makes it to the Pacific Northwest, local conservation issues involving the Sharp-tailed Sandpiper are few.  Population trends are unknown.  The species is listed by the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species, a global conservation effort, as 'a species that requires or would benefit significantly from international cooperative agreements under CMS.'	Similar in size and shape to the more common Pectoral Sandpiper, the rare Sharp-tailed Sandpiper can be distinguished by its rufous cap and distinctive white eye-line.  Adults in breeding plumage are heavily spotted overall. Non-breeding plumage is lighter gray and less boldly streaked.  Juveniles, the form most often seen in Washington, are redder than adults, with a buff-colored, lightly streaked breast, which often serves as their most distinctive field mark.		1	Sharp-tailed Sandpipers breed in wet Siberian tundra. During migration, they usually stop at grassy, coastal salt marshes, although they can also be found in coastal lagoons and mudflats, especially those adjacent to salt marshes.	Sharp-tailed Sandpipers are rare visitors to Washington every year, and can sometimes be found in salt marshes and mudflats on the coast, from mid-August to mid-November. They are most likely seen in October.  Eastern Washington wetlands are also rare, fall stopover points for migrating Sharp-taileds, from early September into mid-October.  The salt marshes at Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) are the best spots for locating them.	In areas where they are more abundant, Sharp-tailed Sandpipers are typically seen in large flocks. In Washington, they are often seen with Pectoral Sandpipers.  They feed by moving steadily along in dense grass, heads down, picking up surface prey and probing lightly.  They are seen on mudflats slightly more often than are Pectorals.	On their breeding grounds, Sharp-tailed Sandpipers eat primarily mosquito larvae. Other invertebrates, including mollusks and crustaceans, are also part of the diet.		Sharp-tailed Sandpipers are polygynous. Males with good territories mate with more than one female.  Each female builds a nest out of grass on the wet, peaty tundra, or on a drier hummock. She incubates the clutch.  After 19-23 days of incubation, the young hatch and leave the nest within a day or so.  They find their own food immediately, but the female protects and tends them.  The young birds begin to fly at 18-21 days.	Sharp-tailed Sandpipers are long-distance migrants. Many birds cross the Bering Strait into Alaska, where they are seen in large numbers.  They then migrate down the coast, but before long veer out into the Pacific Ocean and head to wintering grounds in Australia and New Zealand.  Birds seen in Washington are usually those that have not yet veered out to sea on their migration southward.	sharp-tailed_sandpiper				
86	57	Calidris	alba	Sanderling	Common migrant and winter coast. Rare migrant east.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the worldwide population of Sanderlings at 643,000 birds, with 300,000 breeding in North America and the remainder across Eurasia. Although the Sanderling is one of our most common sandpipers and has a worldwide distribution, it has experienced serious declines, as much as 80% of the population since the early 1970s. Sanderlings rely heavily on a small number of staging areas during migration, and destruction of these areas can seriously affect the population. Declines are probably due to disturbance on feeding areas during migration. The populations on the Pacific Coast fluctuate, but Christmas Bird Count data suggest that the wintering population in the Northwest has actually increased in recent years.	The Sanderling is a small, light-colored sandpiper with a straight, black bill and black legs.  The male and female look similar. In breeding plumage, it has a rufous head and neck and a rufous wash that extends onto its back.  In non-breeding plumage, the adult is white underneath and very pale gray above while the juveniles are white underneath with a dark and light mottled top. Late-molters, Sanderlings don't reach their breeding plumage until late May. This is the only sandpiper that lacks a hind toe, which allows it to be a strong runner.		1	Sanderlings breed farther north than any of the shorebirds found in Washington, nesting in dry, rocky tundra on the land closest to the North Pole.  In winter and during migration, they inhabit broad, coastal beaches with light-colored sand. They can also be found on gravelly and rocky beaches and mudflats, and on top of kelp beds.  In the fall, adults dominate the optimal habitats, and juveniles take the remaining spots.	Sanderlings are common migrants and wintering birds along Washington's outer coastline.  In fact, the highest densities of Sanderlings on the Pacific Coast are around the mouth of the Columbia River in southwest Washington and northwest Oregon.  Birds start returning to Washington in early July, but are uncommon until mid-July. After that, they are common until the following June. The pattern is confounded by the fact that some first-year birds summer on the wintering grounds, so small numbers of Sanderlings are present on the coast year round.  Summering birds are often found at Leadbetter Point.  In the protected waters of Puget Sound, Sanderlings are uncommon but present, year round, sometimes as far south as Olympia.  In the winter these birds are likely to be juveniles, as adults more commonly winter on the outer coast.  In eastern Washington, Sanderlings are a rare but regular migrant. They are more common there during fall migration than spring.	Sanderlings flock, and members of different flocks interchange freely. The quintessential surf-dodger, the Sanderling is most recognized for its behavior of running down to the water's edge with an outgoing wave, and racing back up the beach to avoid the next incoming wave.  Dunlins and Western Sandpipers also do this, so this behavior is not diagnostic.  They feed by probing, and leave bands of holes along a beach where they have stuck their beaks into the sand probing for food.  They also feed in tire tracks. When roosting, they usually stand on one leg, and if disturbed, they will hop away from the disturbance on one leg.	Sanderlings dine on a variety of aquatic invertebrates and sometimes carrion. One study identified young razor clams as a major source of food on the Washington coast.		Sanderlings nest on the dry, northern tundra, often close to lakes or ponds. The nest is on the ground, often on an elevated spot out in the open.  The nest is a shallow scrape lined with leaves. The female generally lays two clutches, and either two males, or one male and the female herself, each incubate a clutch of four eggs.  If the female has two males incubating the eggs, she will depart. If she is incubating a clutch, she will stay with the young, which hatch after 24 to 31 days, until they fledge at about 17 days.  Males also stay with the young, which leave the nest and can feed themselves immediately after hatching.	This is the only shorebird species in which an individual has been recorded on both coasts of North America during migration, indicating that the migration path of the Sanderling is a wide oval.  Migrating birds make long, non-stop flights between traditional stopover points.  They have one of the largest latitudinal winter ranges of any shorebird. Adults leave the breeding grounds in July through mid-August, with juveniles following one month later. Sanderlings of Greenland and Siberia winter throughout coastal Africa and across the southern coast of Eurasia.  The Canadian population winters along both coasts of South America as far south as Tierra del Fuego.	sanderling	SAND			
87	57	Calidris	alpina	Dunlin	Common winter west. Uncommon east.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the Dunlin population at 3,934,000 birds worldwide, with 1,325,000 in North America.  Of that group, 500,000 birds make up the Pacific Coast population.  Dunlin are currently the second most common shorebird in Washington, and the most common of Washington's wintering shorebirds, but numbers have declined in the Northwest in recent decades.  There has been little habitat destruction or disturbance on the breeding grounds to date, but the migration and wintering grounds are threatened by destruction of habitat.  There is currently no reliable information about population status or trends for Dunlin range-wide, so it is unknown if the trend in the Northwest is due to a decrease in population or a shift in range.  Dunlin are considered an indicator species for assessing the health of Holarctic ecosystems, so determining range-wide population trends should be of high priority as reduction in their numbers could indicate that other species that use these ecosystems are at risk.	This small shorebird is distinctive in breeding plumage, with a black belly-patch extending behind its black legs.  Its head and breast are light-colored, and its back is bright rufous.  In non-breeding plumage it is drab gray with a brownish head and breast.  In flight it has white underwings, a white line down the middle of the upperwing, and white on either side of its rump and tail.  The white underwings are especially distinctive in flight.  As a flock twists and turns together in flight, white flashes of underwing are evident from a distance.		1	Tundra-breeders, Dunlin typically nest in wet meadow tundra with low ridges, vegetation hummocks, and nearby ponds.  During migration and winter, they prefer mudflats, but can also be seen on sandy beaches, coastal grasslands, estuaries, and occasionally in muddy, freshwater areas.	On the coast, Dunlin are rare throughout the summer. Fall migrants start showing up at the end of September. By October, they are common, and remain common through mid-May.  Numbers peak at the end of March into April, as birds that wintered farther south join Washington's wintering birds before heading to the breeding grounds.  By the end of May they are rare.  They can be found in all the large coastal bays, but are usually patchily distributed, with thousands of birds in one spot, and none in a nearby, seemingly comparable area.  Large flocks can usually be found, however, in Bellingham Bay (Whatcom County), Skagit Bay (Skagit County), Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County), Willapa Bay (Pacific County), and the Columbia River Estuary (Pacific County).  Most of these areas support flocks of 5,000 or more throughout the winter.  The flock in Grays Harbor averages about 30,000 birds, with numbers much higher on occasion.  Dunlin can also be seen in smaller flocks throughout the Puget Trough in winter. They are uncommon in eastern Washington during migration, with more moving through that region in the spring (from mid-April to mid-May) than fall (October). Small numbers also winter in eastern Washington, particularly at the Walla Walla and Yakima River deltas.	Dunlin flocks are often huge, most impressive when they display their coordinated aerial maneuvers trying to escape predation by Peregrine Falcons and Merlins.  When foraging, they either pick food from the surface or probe in the mud. They feed on exposed mud or in shallow water, making short runs interspersed with periods of feeding.  They feed day or night, depending on the timing of low tide.	On the breeding grounds, insects and insect larvae are the most important source of food.  In coastal habitats, Dunlin also eat marine worms, small crustaceans, mollusks, and other aquatic creatures. They sometimes eat seeds and leaves.		Males typically arrive first on the breeding grounds.  Pairs form when females arrive, but if arrival on the breeding grounds is delayed due to weather, pairs may form prior to arrival.  Former mates often use the same territory as in the previous year.  The male starts a few scrapes, which may be lined with grass, sedge, and willow leaves.  The female chooses one and finishes the construction.  The nest is usually well hidden under a clump of grass or on a hummock.  Both parents incubate the four eggs for 20 to 22 days. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and find their own food. Both parents tend the young, although the female usually abandons the group within a week of hatching.  The male generally stays with the young until they are close to fledging, typically about 19 days.	Dunlin molt before they start the southward migration in the fall, and adults and juveniles migrate at generally the same time.  Late-fall migrants, they are some of the last shorebirds to leave their wintering grounds.  They are short- to medium-distance migrants, and travel from the low Arctic or sub-Arctic to temperate coastal areas in North America, and rarely as far as Central America. Juvenile plumage is seldom seen in Washington, although some birds in juvenile plumage (molting) can be seen in the eastern flyway.	dunlin	DUNL			
88	57	Calidris	bairdii	Baird's Sandpiper	Uncommon fall migrant. Rare spring.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population of Baird's Sandpipers at 300,000 birds.  This species' use of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, as well as major migration staging areas, makes it vulnerable if these areas are lost or degraded.	Baird's Sandpipers are brown shorebirds with black legs and very long wings. Their medium-length bills are fine-tipped and straight. Adults in breeding plumage are light brown, and have black spots on their wings.  Non-breeding adults are gray-brown, and lack spots. The juvenile, the most common form found in Washington, is brown with white-edged feathers that give it a scaly appearance.  In flight, it shows white wing-stripes and a dark line down the middle of its tail, with white on either sides of the rump.		1	Breeding habitat is dry upland tundra.  During migration, Baird's Sandpipers can be found along sandy shores and sometimes mudflats.  They prefer higher, drier habitat than most other small sandpipers. They are also likely to be found in alpine areas, at high-elevation lakes, or even on snow banks.  Wintering grounds are southern South American grasslands.	Baird's Sandpipers are uncommon migrants in Washington, usually seen during fall migration.  They are rare from mid-April to late May; those that do pass through in spring are more common east of the Cascades.  Most of the Baird's Sandpipers in Washington, however, are juveniles seen in fall.  Fall birds may be seen in Washington as early as late June, but they are rare until early August. On the coast, at places such as Ocean Shores, they are most likely from early August through September, although some late stragglers may be seen into October.  Inland, they are uncommon as early as July, but are more common from August through mid-September. They become less common through the end of September, and are rarely seen through October.  Good inland spots are the Walla Walla River delta and Rock Lake.	Baird's Sandpipers are generally found individually or in small flocks. Flock size can be greater mid-continent where they are more common. Baird's Sandpipers typically forage along the upper edge of mudflats, or up on sandy beaches, often in vegetation. They will sometimes forage in the water, but not regularly.  Birds in the mountains will feed on snow banks.  They move quickly with heads up, picking up surface prey.	Baird's Sandpipers are primarily insect-eaters.		The nest is located on the ground among rocks and perhaps in low ground cover, sometimes well hidden in a grass clump.  The male builds most of the nest, which is a shallow scrape lined with lichen, grass, and leaves.  Both parents help incubate the four eggs for 19 to 22 days. The young leave the nest soon after hatching and feed themselves. Both parents brood and tend the young at first, but the female usually abandons the brood before they fledge.  The male stays with the brood until they begin to fly, at 16 to 20 days.	These long-distance migrants travel up and down the interior of North America. Females head south slightly ahead of the males, and many birds congregate in the Great Plains and the central valleys of Mexico before flying nonstop to southern South America.	bairds_sandpiper	BASA			
89	57	Calidris	canutus	Red Knot	Uncommon migrant outer coast.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the global population at 1,290,000 birds, with 400,000 in North America.  They were once more abundant in North America but were reduced by hunting in the late 1800s. Protection from hunting has led to some recovery, but the population has declined sharply for unknown reasons since the 1960s.  Red Knots are currently listed on the Partners in Flight watch list. Over-harvesting of horseshoe crabs on the East Coast has resulted in the loss of a critical food supply during migration.  Other threats to the population are the development of shorelines, limiting habitat, increased human disturbance, and oil spills along their migration routes and wintering range.	The Red Knot is a sturdy, medium-sized shorebird with a short, straight bill and olive-yellow legs.  In breeding plumage, it is bright rufous below and mottled gray and black above.  The adult in non-breeding plumage is gray overall.  The juvenile has white-tipped feathers on its wings, giving the wings a scalloped look.		1	Red Knots breed in the far north, mostly above the Arctic Circle in both North America and Eurasia. Breeding grounds are often inland from the coast, and usually near a pond or stream.  Red Knots migrate through and winter along shorelines around the world.  Large sandy estuaries and tidal flats are most preferred.	Red Knots migrate through Washington and are far more common in spring than fall.  Some areas of Washington consistently have large flocks of Red Knots, while they are absent elsewhere. This patchy distribution is typical of the species.  The largest flock is typically at Bottle Beach in Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County).  Other flocks are often seen around the perimeter of Willapa Bay and at Leadbetter Point. There are also usually flocks at Bowerman Basin in Grays Harbor. Spring migrants begin to arrive in mid- to late April. By late April, they are common, and then begin to taper off by the end of May.  Red Knots are not common anywhere else on the Pacific Coast south of southern Alaska.  Outside of these flocks, they are uncommon throughout coastal Washington in spring.  In the fall, birds are seen in small numbers, but not in the huge flocks of the spring.  They are found in western Washington from mid-August to mid-October, and there are rare reports in winter.  Some birds, usually juveniles, also come through eastern Washington in the fall and have been sighted at the Walla Walla River delta (Walla Walla County) from early July to mid-October.	Red Knots form enormous flocks during migration and in winter. They are often found in flocks with Black-bellied Plovers and Short-billed Dowitchers. In the tundra, they feed by sight, picking food from the surface. On tidal flats, they probe for food with their bills--probing a few times and then running to a new spot.	On their breeding grounds, Red Knots eat insects (especially flies) as well as plant matter, especially early in the season before many insects are out.  Small invertebrates including mollusks, crustaceans, and marine worms are part of the diet during migration and winter.  Eastern populations eat numerous horseshoe crabs during migration.		Males perform aerial displays high over the moist tundra and glacial till that are their nesting grounds.  The nest is on the ground, usually near water. It is a shallow scrape lined with leaves, lichen, and moss.  Both parents incubate the 3 to 4 eggs for 21 to 22 days. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and feed themselves. The female departs shortly after the young hatch, leaving the male to tend the young for 18 to 20 days, until they can fly.	Red Knots winter on shorelines around the world. Many of the birds migrating through Washington are on their way to southern South America for the winter.  These are late-spring migrants and are seldom seen before mid-April. They are usually present through May.	red_knot				
90	57	Calidris	ferruginea	Curlew Sandpiper		LC		Casual fall migrant on the North Olympic and outer coasts; accidental in spring (one record each east and west).		1								curlew_sandpiper				
91	57	Calidris	fuscicollis	White-rumped Sandpiper		LC		Two spring records (both from Reardan, Lincoln County) and one from Dungeness (Clallam County), in early July.		1								white-rumped_sandpiper				
92	57	Calidris	himantopus	Stilt Sandpiper	Rare fall migrant.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population of Stilt Sandpipers at 200,000 birds.  Populations in some areas have declined, while others have increased. The range-wide status of the population is unknown.  This species has a limited and disconnected breeding range, and degradation of some of that habitat is of conservation concern.  Changes in land use on South American wintering grounds are also of concern, because some winter gathering spots are being developed.  Stilt Sandpipers are listed on the Partners in Flight watch list because of their narrow breeding and wintering distributions, relatively small population, and unknown trends in population.	Often described as looking like a yellowlegs and feeding like a dowitcher, the Stilt Sandpiper is a medium-sized, long-legged wader.  Its breeding plumage is distinctive, but rarely seen in Washington.  It is heavily barred brown-and-white above and below, with a white eye-line that separates a rufous cap and cheek.  In non-breeding plumage, the Stilt Sandpiper is pale gray, with a light, unstreaked belly and white eye-line.  Juveniles are light brownish-gray with lightly streaked breasts and scaled backs.  In flight, they show gray and white underwings, solid gray upperwings, white rumps, and gray tails.		1	Stilt Sandpipers' breeding grounds are in the Arctic tundra, north of the tree line.  They nest in wet sedge-meadows with raised ridges and hummocks.  During the non-breeding season, they are usually found in fresh water ponds, marshes, lagoons, and flooded fields.	Stilt Sandpipers are rare in Puget Sound and coastal Washington from mid-June through September, with occasional sightings before and after. In eastern Washington, they are rarely reported from early July through September, with scattered later sightings.	Large flocks of Stilt Sandpipers are common in areas where they are abundant, but in Washington, single birds or a few birds are generally seen mixed with flocks of dowitchers or Lesser Yellowlegs. Stilt Sandpipers usually forage in shallow water up to their bellies. They probe in the mud for food, often moving their heads up and down, sometimes under water, in a sewing-machine motion like that of a dowitcher.  They also pick food from the surface of the water.	Stilt Sandpipers eat a wide variety of insects and insect larvae during the breeding season.  At other times of the year, they eat seeds, leaves, and roots of aquatic plants, marine worms, and other aquatic invertebrates.		Stilt Sandpipers generally don't breed until they are two years old.  Males arrive on the breeding grounds a few days before females. Pairs form once the females arrive. The male makes a few scrapes in a dry spot on the ground, often on a ridge or hummock of sedge, surrounded by water. The female then chooses one of the scrapes for the nest.  The nest may be sparsely lined with sedge leaves.  Both parents incubate the four eggs for 19 to 21 days.  The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and find their own food.  Both parents tend the young at first, but the female usually leaves within seven days. The male stays with the young for 10 to 14 days, but abandons the young before they can fly well, at 17 to 18 days.  Each pair raises only one brood per season.	These long-distance travelers migrate through the Great Plains on both their northward and southward routes. They winter as far south as northern South America, although a few can be found wintering in the southern United States.  During the fall migration, when juveniles follow about a month behind adults, the migration route is spread out, and some birds stray as far as the West Coast.	stilt_sandpiper	STSA			
93	57	Calidris	mauri	Western Sandpiper	Common migrant. Uncommon winter coast.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population at 3,500,000 birds, but other estimates are of 6,500,000 birds. Although Western Sandpipers are abundant, they are vulnerable because such a large percentage of the population gathers in so few spots during migration. Development, human disturbance, and oil spills near these stopover sites could dramatically affect the population. The Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network identifies Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County) as a stop-over site of 'hemispheric significance.' Much of the information on population trends for Western Sandpipers in Washington is difficult to interpret due to suspected mis-identification of birds resulting in earlier counts being artificially high. Thus, some negative trends in population may be a reflection of more accurate current counts, rather than a true decline, although this should not diminish the importance of habitat protection.	The most abundant shorebird in Washington, the Western Sandpiper is a member of the group known as peeps or stints. In breeding plumage, it has a deep rufous crown and cheek patch, and rufous on the wings. It is heavily streaked and spotted on the breast and back. By fall, much of this color has faded or worn off. Its slightly drooping bill, black legs, and bright rufous patches in breeding plumage help distinguish it from the other Washington peeps, the Least and Semipalmated Sandpipers. The adult in non-breeding plumage is drab gray with a white breast. Juveniles look similar to adults in breeding plumage, but their breasts are not streaked. They have rufous on their backs, but not on their heads or cheeks. Their plumage is not sexually dimorphic, but females have slightly longer bills than males. In flight, they show a white stripe down their wings and white on either side of their tails.		1	Most of the population of Western Sandpipers breeds in Alaska, in dry tundra areas with low shrub cover and nearby marshes. During migration, they are mostly coastal, but some migrate across land and stop over at inland wetlands. During coastal migration and in winter, they occur in most shoreline habitats, but prefer mudflats and sandy beaches.	Western Sandpipers may be found year round along Washington's coast, although they are most common during migration. They are rare from late May to late June, when fall migrants start to arrive. They become common in July, and remain common through mid-May, when they start tapering off as they head to northern breeding grounds. Juveniles are very widespread in the fall, often occurring in a wider range of habitats, including southern Puget Sound. Wintering birds are usually found at Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County), Willapa Bay (Pacific County), and Drayton Harbor (Whatcom County). Most of these are first-year males. Grays Harbor hosts hundreds of thousands of migrating Western Sandpipers in April. Eastern Washington also sees migrating Western Sandpipers, although they are far more common in the fall than in the spring. They are uncommon from mid-April to late May in the spring, and common from July through September in the fall. Birds are also seen on either end of these ranges, although they are rare.	Western Sandpipers form huge flocks in the spring. Typically found walking with their heads in the water, Western Sandpipers mostly probe for food, but will also pick food from the surface. Because of their long bills, they can feed in deeper water than other peeps.	During the breeding season, insect larvae are the food of choice. The migration and winter diet is primarily crustaceans, mollusks, marine worms, and other aquatic invertebrates.		Males typically arrive on the breeding grounds first and establish territories. Monogamous pair bonds form after the females arrive. The male starts several nest scrapes, and the female selects one and lines it with leaves, lichen, and sedge. Both parents incubate the four eggs for 21 days. The young leave the nest within a few hours of hatching and find their own food. The female often deserts the group within a few days of hatching, and joins other post-breeding females in a flock. The male tends the young, and broods them in cold weather until they can fly, at 17 to 21 days.	Most Western Sandpipers migrate along the Pacific Coast, but many migrate across the continent to winter on the East and Gulf Coasts. Some birds winter as far away as northern South America. Fall migration is early but prolonged. Adults begin heading south at the end of June, and juveniles follow in early August. Migration continues into fall.	western_sandpiper	WESA			
94	57	Calidris	melanotos	Pectoral Sandpiper	Fairly common fall migrant. Rare spring.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population of Pectoral Sandpipers at 400,000 birds, with about half that number breeding in North America. Historical reports of enormous numbers along migratory corridors indicate that the population is not what it once was.  While hunting may have had an impact in the late 1800s and early 1900s, habitat destruction is currently the most significant threat. There is not a lot of reliable information on population trends of this species, and more data would be helpful. However at this point, the Pectoral Sandpiper is not classified as a species in need of high-priority conservation.	Described as a larger version of a Least Sandpiper, the Pectoral Sandpiper is a medium-sized shorebird with a heavily streaked breast, sharply contrasting clear, white belly, and yellowish legs.  The bill droops and is black at the tip, and lighter brown at the base.  In flight, the tail shows a dark stripe down the middle, with white on either side. The upper wing has a very narrow stripe.  Males are larger than females, and males have inflatable sacs in their breasts, used in courtship.		1	Pectoral Sandpipers breed all across the North American Arctic and across northern Siberia at the dry edges of well-vegetated wetlands.  During migration, they can be found in fresh- and saltwater marshes, on mudflats, or drying lakes and wet meadows.  They winter in South American grasslands.	Migrants are much more common in Washington in fall than spring.  Fall visitors start showing up in the interior in small numbers in late June. Their numbers increase into July and August, and by mid-August they are common. By late October, numbers start tapering off.  They are uncommon by the end of October, and rare through most of November.  Coastal birds start arriving in mid-July, but are uncommon through mid-August. From mid-August to October, they are common, then become uncommon again through early November. A few stragglers can sometimes be seen through the end of November.  Most of these birds are juvenile.	Pectoral Sandpipers move along steadily with their heads down, picking up prey on the surface and probing lightly into the sand or mud.  They usually forage in vegetation, and when they are disturbed, they stand upright with their necks extended, peering over the grass.	During the breeding season, Pectoral Sandpipers eat flies and fly larvae, spiders, and seeds.  During migration, they eat small crustaceans and other aquatic invertebrates, although insects may still be the major food.		Pectoral Sandpipers are promiscuous: males mate with multiple females, and females mate with multiple males.  Males arrive on the breeding grounds before females and establish territories. When females arrive, the males attract them with a flight display, rhythmically expanding and contracting the air sacs in their breasts.  The female builds a nest in a grassy spot on the ground, often on a slightly elevated spot.  The nest is usually a well-hidden scrape lined with grass and leaves, sometimes under low shrubs.  She provides all the parental care. Incubation lasts for 21 to 23 days, and the four chicks leave the nest and feed themselves soon after hatching.  The female stays with the young for about 10 to 20 days.  The young start to fly at around 21 days, and are capable flyers by 30 days.	Extreme long-distance migrants, some Pectoral Sandpipers make an 18,000-mile round-trip journey between breeding and wintering grounds.  The birds that migrate through Washington most likely breed in Siberia and migrate across the Bering Strait and down the Pacific Coast.  They winter in southern South America, Australia, and New Zealand.	pectoral_sandpiper	PESA			
95	57	Calidris	minuta	Little Stint		LC		The first state record was found at the Yakima River delta (Benton County) in early August 2004.		1								little_stint				
96	57	Calidris	minutilla	Least Sandpiper	Common migrant. Uncommon winter west, rare east.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the Least Sandpiper population at 600,000 birds. Christmas Bird Count data suggest that wintering Least Sandpipers have declined in Washington.  However, many population estimates tend to be insufficient for this species, as it is often lumped with the other small sandpipers and therefore may be undercounted. Also, winter numbers have always been small and are probably not an indicator of the overall health of the population. Least Sandpipers are adaptable and can quickly colonize new breeding habitat. This and their tendency not to congregate in major wintering areas should help the Least Sandpiper in the face of habitat loss, increased disturbance, and contamination.	The delicate Least Sandpiper is the world's smallest shorebird.  In breeding plumage, it is mostly brown, including the breast.  It does not have the streaks and spots on its side that the Western Sandpiper has.  The adult in non-breeding plumage is drab gray, with a dark breast. The bill is relatively short and fine-tipped, with a slight droop at the end.  Its yellow legs distinguish it from the other two Washington peeps, Western and Semipalmated Sandpipers, which have black legs.  In flight, the Least Sandpiper shows a white stripe down its wing and white on either sides of its tail.  The underwings are slightly darker than those of the other two peeps, as well.  Juveniles are also brownish, but may be brighter rufous than adults, especially in comparison to the faded fall breeding plumage of the adults.		1	Least Sandpipers breed from the northern boreal forest to the sub-Arctic tundra.  They typically nest in sedge meadows, muskeg bogs, or coastal wetlands.  They migrate all across North America, and some migratory and wintering habitat is coastal, while some is inland. Coastal migrants can often be found along tidal creeks, salt marsh edges, and mudflats, rarely on sandy ocean beaches.  Inland migrants inhabit small, shallow ponds, sandy riverbanks, sewage treatment ponds, and lakeshores.	On the Washington coast, Least Sandpipers can be found most months of the year. Southbound birds begin to arrive in the latter half of June, becoming more common in July. They are usually common until September, when numbers begin to drop off. They winter from Grays Harbor south, and remain uncommon through the winter until April, when spring birds start heading north. During the peak period in late April, concentrations of five to ten thousand have been counted at Grays Harbor. They are usually abundant into mid-May, when numbers start to drop off again, tapering off to rare by the end of May.  In eastern Washington, southbound birds arrive in appropriate wetlands at the beginning of July.  They are common through mid-September, and some birds are usually present until mid-October. Sightings from mid-October through early April are rare.  Spring migrants start passing through in mid-April, and are common from late April through early May, tapering off into early June.  They are less common than Westerns in both spring and fall.	Least Sandpipers usually roost by themselves or in small groups.  They generally feed at the upper edge of mudflats, often in the vegetation, i.e., higher than Western or Semipalmated Sandpipers.  When foraging, they walk slowly with their heads down, picking at food on the surface rather than probing into the mud.	On the breeding grounds and in inland areas, Least Sandpipers primarily eat fly larvae and other insects.  On the coast, they eat small crustaceans, snails, and other marine creatures.		Males arrive on the breeding grounds about a week before females and establish territories. Monogamous pairs form quickly after the females arrive.  The nest is on the ground near water, and usually on a tuft of grass or moss. The male begins the shallow scrape, and the female finishes it, lining it with grass, leaves, and moss.  Both parents help incubate the 4 eggs for about 20 days. As incubation progresses, the male takes a larger and larger share.  The young leave the nest within a day of hatching, and feed themselves. The parents will brood and tend the young, and the male generally stays with the brood until they fledge at about three weeks.  In later clutches, the female may actually leave before the young hatch, but usually she helps tend the young for the first week or so.	Least Sandpipers migrate across North America and winter from the southern United States into northern South America.  Many stage at the Copper River Delta in Alaska in spring, but they remain spread out on the winter range, not concentrating in a few spots as many other shorebirds do.	least_sandpiper	LESA			
97	57	Calidris	ptilocnemis	Rock Sandpiper	Uncommon migrant and winter on coast.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the global population at 200,000 birds, with 150,000 breeding in North America. The remainder breed on the northeast Asian coast. The Rock Sandpiper has been declining in this state for unknown reasons since the 1970s. This decline is only in the southern end of their winter range and has not been reflected on their breeding grounds.  Rock Sandpipers are listed as an at-risk species on the Partners in Flight watch list, and more study is needed to understand the factors contributing to their decline.	A heavily speckled, cryptic bird, the Rock Sandpiper is well camouflaged. The adult in breeding plumage is reddish above, with gray wings. Its bill is slightly drooped and of medium length. It has a heavily streaked neck and breast, reddish-brown cap, and dark patch on its cheek.  It has a dark patch on its belly that does not extend behind its legs (as in the Dunlin).  Its legs are gray in the breeding season, but turn to yellow in the non-breeding season. Non-breeding birds are gray with white-edged feathers, giving them a scalloped look overall.  The juvenile appears similar to the adult in breeding plumage, but lacks the reddish-brown cap and dark belly.  Since adult birds molt on the breeding grounds before migrating south, juveniles should be easily distinguished from adults when they first arrive in Washington in the fall.		1	During the breeding season, Rock Sandpipers inhabit dry, barren tundra. The rest of the year, they are rarely found away from the habitat from which they earned their name.  They usually forage below the tide line of rocky beaches and jetties on the Washington coast.	The Rock Sandpiper is an uncommon species found on jetties (such as the jetty at Ocean Shores) and the rocky shores of coastal Washington from October to mid-May.  Rarely, a few birds are seen at either end of that time period, as early as August, and as late as the end of May. Rarely, birds are seen in protected waters, south into Puget Sound as far as Seattle.  They have not been recorded in eastern Washington.	In Washington, Rock Sandpipers are usually found singly or in small groups, in flocks with Black Turnstones and Surfbirds.  They are fairly gregarious, but will sometimes gather in groups separate from the other rock shorebirds. Unlike their counterparts on the rocks, Rock Sandpipers do not chip or pry attached prey from its substrate.  They move slowly along and pick up moving prey from the crevices and seaweed among the rocks.	Rock Sandpipers are unusual among shorebirds in that they commonly eat vegetable matter, including seeds, berries, moss, and algae.  They also eat invertebrates, including mollusks, crustaceans, and marine worms.		The nest of the Rock Sandpiper is located on the ground in the open, dry tundra, often on a raised area of lichen or moss.  The male begins a deep scrape, and the female may help by adding lichen, leaves, or grass. Both parents help incubate the four eggs, although the male may provide most of the incubation, which lasts for about 20 days.  The chicks leave the nest soon after hatching and feed themselves.  The male usually tends the brood, although sometimes both parents or only the female will do so.  The young probably begin to fly at about three weeks.	Adults molt on the breeding grounds before migrating south, so southward migration is late in the fall.  Some populations that breed on islands off Alaska are resident. The populations that migrate winter along the Pacific coast to northern California.	rock_sandpiper				
98	57	Calidris	pusilla	Semipalmated Sandpiper	Uncommon fall migrant. Rare spring.	NT	Semipalmated Sandpipers are abundant but vulnerable. The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population at 3,500,000 birds.  They depend heavily on a few key stopover points. Some of these have been protected, but others are vulnerable to development.  Habitat destruction remains their biggest threat.	The Semipalmated Sandpiper is a small shorebird in the group known as peeps or stints. The Semipalmated Sandpiper gets its name from the slight webbing at the base of its toes. This can be difficult to see and is not diagnostic, as other sandpipers also have these webbed feet.  Its stubby bill and drab plumage help distinguish it from the other peeps, the Least and Western Sandpipers.  The adult in breeding plumage is mottled black-and-brown, with little or no rufous coloration.  The adult in non-breeding plumage is light gray with a lighter belly. The legs of the adult are black, distinguishing this bird from the yellow-legged Least Sandpiper. In flight, the Semipalmated Sandpiper shows a white stripe down its wings and white on either side of its tail.  Juveniles look similar to adults in breeding plumage, and rarely have the rufous coloration seen on juvenile Western and Least Sandpipers.  In the late summer when we are most likely to see them, the juveniles have not reached adult plumage, and their legs may be olive-colored.		1	Semipalmated Sandpipers breed in the Arctic tundra, usually near water, across northern North America.  During migration and winter, they inhabit beaches, mudflats, shallow estuaries, and inlets.  Birds in Washington are usually found in freshwater ponds, even near coastal areas.	Washington is just outside the normal range of Semipalmated Sandpipers, but slightly off-course migrants are reported regularly during migration.  A few birds are usually seen on the coast from late April through May. Adults are seen from late June to mid-August.  Juveniles are slightly more common than adults and pass through from late July to mid-September.  A few are sometimes seen at freshwater and brackish ponds in the Puget Sound region. Crockett Lake (Island County) is the most reliable place for finding them. They may also appear at the Union Bay Natural Area/Montlake Fill (Seattle, King County).  In eastern Washington, they are rare in spring (May), with only a few recorded sightings. In the fall they are more regular, with small numbers of adults passing through in mid-July. There have been a few records at Wenas Lake (Yakima County) in August, but eastern Washington wetlands at the Walla Walla River delta (Walla Walla County), Othello (Adams County), and Reardan (Lincoln County) are more likely spots.	They are surface feeders, running and stopping frequently, grabbing food from the surface of the sand or mud.  They also occasionally probe in the mud.  They move faster than Western Sandpipers and feed in shallower water, which may help distinguish the two but is not a surefire distinction.	During breeding season, Semipalmated Sandpipers eat insects, including flies and larvae, and other invertebrates.  The winter and migration diet consists of small crustaceans and aquatic insects, mollusks, and marine worms.		Semipalmated Sandpipers first breed at two years.  Males arrive on the breeding grounds shortly before the females and begin establishing territories immediately. Monogamous pairs form soon after the females arrive.  The male starts several nest scrapes, and the female selects one that they both line with leaves, grass, and moss.  The nest is usually located on top of a low mound or small island, under a small shrub or in a sedge tussock.  Both parents incubate the four eggs for about 20 days.  The young leave the nest soon after they hatch and find their own food immediately.  The male broods them quite often during the first four or five days, and for the first eight nights.  Females often leave the brood before they fledge, sometimes as soon as the young hatch.  Males tend the young until they fledge.  The young start to take short flights at 14 to 15 days, and can make sustained flights at 16 to 19 days.	Semipalmated Sandpipers are long-distance migrants. Different breeding populations take different migratory routes, but most winter on the Atlantic coast, south of the United States. The Alaskan breeding population migrates coastally to Vancouver, BC, and then heads inland, moving across the mid-continent in both fall and spring.	semipalmated_sandpiper				
99	57	Calidris	ruficollis	Red-necked Stint		LC		The first state record occurred at Dungeness (Clallam County) in late July 2005.		1								red-necked_stint				
100	57	Calidris	temminckii	Temminck's Stint		LC		The first state record remained for several days at the sewage treatment ponds in Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) in November 2005.		1								temmincks_stint				
101	57	Calidris	tenuirostris	Great Knot		EN		One record, from early September at La Push (Clallam County).		1								great_knot				
102	38	Callipepla	californica	California Quail	Common resident east. Fairly common west.	LC	The California Quail was introduced into Washington from the southwestern United States.   It adapts well to encroaching human populations and is often found in wooded suburbs and city parks, where it is subject to predation by cats.  Changing habitats that increase edge and maintain early successional habitat benefit the quail.  Conversion of small farms to large agribusiness without hedgerows has a negative impact on the population.	The California Quail is a gray, ground-dwelling bird, more slender than most other quail. It has a light breast with scaled patterning, white streaks along brown sides, and black and gray scaling on the nape of the neck.  The female has a tan head with a small feather plume. The male has a bold black face outlined in white, with a brown crown and a pendulous feather plume hanging forward from his forehead.		1	California Quail are most often found in edge habitat with food-producing plants and shrubs for cover. Many forest types provide such habitat at their edges, as do steppe zones, low- to mid-density residential areas, parks, roadsides, and traditional agriculture.	California Quail are common and widespread in Washington. They are found in shrubby areas, farmlands, residential areas, and city parks.  In western Washington, they can be found in the Puget Trough south to the Willamette Valley, in the San Juan Islands, and on the Olympic Peninsula in Sequim.  In eastern Washington, they can be found in most areas with water below the lower tree line. In the Blue Mountains, the species is expanding up creek and river valleys.  They are absent from the vast tracts of dry wheat and from the moist river valleys in the northeast corner of the state.	California Quail are predominantly ground dwellers, although the males spend much time off the ground in bushes, trees, and on manmade structures, especially when calling.  They live in groups called 'coveys' that move about within a home range during the non-breeding season.  During the breeding season, coveys break up into breeding pairs that spread out across the home range to nest.	In Washington, California Quail rely heavily on seeds, especially those from legumes.  They will also eat leaves, fresh shoots, berries, acorns, and insects.	Introduced from southwestern United States. In Kittitas County, common and widespread in most habitats below lower tree line, though less common and local in pure grasslands and undisturbed shrub-steppe. Fairly common, but local, in open lowland landscapes of Puget Trough counties; especially widespread on Whidbey Island but scarce on Camano Island (no BBA records). Found chiefly about shrubby edges, farmlands, riparian shrubs, residential areas, and city parks.	Ground nesters, California Quail usually find a spot under a shrub or brush-pile or next to a log or other cover where they build a shallow depression lined with grasses and leaves.  Sometimes they nest above ground, on a broken branch or in the old nest of another bird. Females lay and incubate a clutch of 10-16 eggs.  Although the young are able to walk about and feed themselves almost immediately after hatching, both parents continue to tend to them, the female brooding them at night and in cold weather, and the male acting as a sentry, watching for danger.	Although the California Quail is a permanent resident, it moves seasonally within its home range.	california_quail	CAQU			
103	65	Calypte	anna	Anna's Hummingbird	Fairly common resident west. Rare east.	LC	Historically limited to western California, in recent years Anna's Hummingbirds have dramatically expanded their range northward as far as British Columbia.  This expansion has been attributed to hummingbird feeders and gardens with exotic flowers that provide the birds with a year-round food source.  Climate change may also play a role.  They are currently very common across much of their range, and because they adapt well to suburban areas, should continue to thrive in the future.	The Anna's Hummingbird is a medium-sized hummingbird with a relatively short, straight bill and a long sloping forehead.  Both males and females are bronze-green above, and gray below.  Males are easy to distinguish from other hummingbirds as their entire heads and throats are bright iridescent red.  Female have green heads, with a small amount of red on their throats.  Females have black tails with white tips, while the males' tails are solid blackish-gray.		1	Anna's Hummingbirds live in a wide variety of habitats, including open woods.  Chaparral is their traditional habitat, although in recent years they have been found more often in suburban gardens where hummingbird feeders and exotic plantings provide them with food throughout the year.  In Washington, Anna's Hummingbirds are most often found in suburban parks, gardens, and coastal valleys.	The first breeding record in Washington was in Tacoma (Pierce County) in 1976, and they are now found breeding throughout the lowlands of southeastern Puget Sound (from Edmonds in Snohomish County to Tacoma in Pierce County).  Non-breeding populations can be found in riparian areas throughout the Columbia Basin. Christmas Bird Counts document the presence of Anna's Hummingbird throughout western Washington in the winter.	One of the most distinctive behaviors of the Anna's Hummingbird is the male's courtship flight dive.  He flies high in the air and then plummets.  At the bottom of the dive, he makes a loud, distinctive popping noise, called the dive noise.  The origin of the dive noise is not fully understood, but is thought to be mostly vocal.  The vocalization may or may not be supplemented with noise from air rushing through the feathers.  In addition to the dive noise, the very vocal Anna's Hummingbird makes a variety of buzzes, chips, and chatters.  Both males and females defend feeding territories, although males defend them more diligently and for a longer period of time.	Anna's Hummingbirds feed on nectar from flowers and feeders, as well as small insects and spiders that they catch in the air or glean from tree trunks and branches.  They also visit sapsucker holes and feed on sap and insects attracted to the holes.	During BBA period, fairly common but local, and increasing, in King County lowlands. Great increase in last ten years not reflected in BBA records, since most western King County surveys date from early phase (1987&#8211;1993). Now common in shrubby vegetation in urban, suburban, and exurban parks, gardens, and residential areas; fairly common and still increasing in rural landscapes out to edge of forested foothills. Rapidly expanding its Washington range; no BBA records for Kittitas or Kitsap Counties, but several in Island County likely represent pioneers.	Males and females do not form lasting pair bonds.  Females construct the nest, incubate the eggs, and feed the nestlings on their own.  They build their nests on a wide variety of surfaces, most often on the branch of a shrub or tree at heights varying from 3-27 feet from the ground, situated near suitable food sources.  Nests are cup-shaped, made of plant fibers, spider webs, and feathers, with a lichen exterior.  The female incubates two eggs for 14-19 days.  She feeds and cares for them by herself until they become independent at 18-23 days.	Anna's Hummingbird migration has been described as a succession of movements and temporary residences wherever suitable flowers and feeders are found. In Washington, Anna's Hummingbird appears throughout the year. It is unclear whether this is due to migration or whether the birds we see in January are the same as those we see in June.	annas_hummingbird	ANHU			
104	65	Calypte	costae	Costa's Hummingbird		LC		Three recent records of birds frequenting feeders in Puget lowlands one fall and two spring.		1								costas_hummingbird				
105	22	Caracara	cheriway	Crested Caracara		LC		Sightings of Crested Caracara in the Pacific Coast states were long considered suspect due to the possibility that they represented birds escaped from captivity. However, a recent upsurge of records has led to a reconsideration. The Washington Bird Records Committee has now accepted three records as wild birds: Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) in August 1983, Neah Bay (Clallam County) in January 1998, and Oakville (Grays Harbor County) in May 2006.		1								crested_caracara				
106	24	Carduelis	flammea	Common Redpoll	Irregular winter visitor.	LC	While there is no reliable information on population trends, Common Redpolls breed in regions and habitats that are not generally subject to habitat degradation.  Their wintering range is extensive, and they are flexible, quickly moving on to new areas if others are unsuitable.	The Common Redpoll is slightly larger than the American Goldfinch.  The male is heavily streaked and has a small, red crown and pink breast.  The female is duller than the male and lacks the pink breast, but does have the same red 'poll' as the male.		1	Redpolls are Arctic and sub-Arctic breeders, and Common Redpolls typically breed in open coniferous forests and shrubby birch and alder thickets.  During winter they inhabit various kinds of semi-open country, including woodland edges and brushy or weedy fields.  They can often be found in birch, alder, or willow patches.	Winter visitors, Common Redpolls vary in abundance and location from year to year.  They are most regular in the northern portion of the state and in far eastern Washington, where they are generally present every winter.  They are rare in western Washington.  They are often found with flocks of Pine Siskins and American Goldfinches.	Busy and acrobatic, Common Redpolls forage in flocks along hedgerows or in catkin-bearing trees.  They are well adapted to feeding at the very tips of small branches, hanging upside-down, and using their feet to hold food items.  They also forage on the ground, especially in winter, and move in rolling waves across ground-feeding areas. They have pouches in their throats that allow them to gather large amounts of food quickly, and then retreat to a safe place to process the food.  In winter, they will drop from a tree into deep snow and make a tunnel about a foot long to a roosting chamber. Like many finches, they have an undulating flight pattern.  They are quite vocal, making constant contact calls within their flocks, and are often located by their flight calls.	Common Redpolls eat tiny seeds, especially those from willow, birch, and alder trees.  They also eat buds, weeds, grasses, and insects.  They feed insects and spiders to their young.		Common Redpolls form monogamous pairs.  Nests may be placed close together and are well hidden in dense, low shrubs, in clumps of grass, or under brush piles.  The female builds an open cup nest of loosely arranged twigs, grass, and moss, lined with ptarmigan feathers, plant down, and hair.  The female incubates 4 to 6 eggs for about 11 days.  The male brings food to the female while she incubates and while she broods the young. About five days after the young hatch, the female begins to bring food to the nest. She continues to do most of the actual feeding.  The young leave the nest 11 to 12 days after hatching. At this point, they can fly weakly and follow the parents around.  They are fully independent at about 26 days of age.	Common Redpolls breed in the sub-Arctic.  If enough food is available, many birds will remain on the breeding grounds in winter, but many birds move south.  The winter range is variable, based on food supply, but generally encompasses the northern tier of the United States.	common_redpoll				
107	24	Carduelis	hornemanni	Hoary Redpoll		LC		A close relative of the Common Redpoll and extremely similar in appearance, the Hoary Redpoll nests on High Arctic tundra in the Old and New Worlds. In North America it winters southward across Canada and rarely into the northern contiguous United States, usually in small numbers mixed in with flocks of Common Redpolls. In general Hoary Redpoll appears grayer (less brown) than Common, as if dredged in flour; it is also slightly larger and has a shorter bill. Specific field marks to look for include the Hoary&#8217;s unstreaked white rump; undertail coverts either unstreaked or with a single fine streak; and streaking on the sides less extensive and finer than on Common. Adult males are lightly flushed pale pink on the breast, as opposed to the uniform deep-rose breast coloration of Common. However, characteristics of the two species overlap, and not all redpolls can be safely separated in the field.

Although irregularly common in northeastern British Columbia east of the Continental Divide, Hoary Redpoll is a casual visitor elsewhere in the province, as it is in Idaho. During the unprecedented irruption of Common Redpolls in the winter of 2001&#8211;2002 at least 15 Hoary Redpolls were reported in Idaho. Six of Washington&#8217;s 12 accepted records came during that same winter. Oregon has just two accepted records, both of them from the northeastern part of the state.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								hoary_redpoll				
108	24	Carduelis	pinus	Pine Siskin	Common resident. Uncommon winter east.	LC	Although considered Washington's most common finch, the Pine Siskin has suffered a significant annual decline in population since 1966, according to the Breeding Bird Survey.  Due to the irruptive nature of this species, populations vary widely from year to year, and trends can be difficult to interpret.  Parasitism by Brown-headed Cowbirds can have a significant impact on Pine Siskin productivity, and forest fragmentation has increased their contact with cowbirds.  Maintaining large tracts of coniferous forest will help keep this bird common.	Pine Siskins are small, streaked, yellow-tinged finches. Their bills are slimmer than those of most finches. Males often have yellow wing-stripes and tails, although the yellow is highly variable. Like other finches, they have notched tails. Their wings are relatively long.		1	Throughout their range, Pine Siskins typically breed in coniferous forests, although they are often found in mixed forests in the Puget Trough.  During migration and winter, they can be found in many types of semi-open areas, including forest edges and weedy fields.	Pine Siskins are common and widespread, permanent residents in appropriate habitat throughout Washington's lowlands.  Numbers vary from year to year, but they are generally more common west of the Cascades than east, and flocks numbering over 2,000 birds have been seen in winter along the outer coast.  In winter, they are most readily observed feeding in trees with catkins, such as birch and alder.	Pine Siskins form flocks year round, and winter flocks may be quite large.  They can be very common at bird feeders in urban areas. (Unfortunately, such dense concentrations may spread salmonella, especially when feeders are not properly cleaned.) Pine Siskins are active foragers and climb about nimbly when foraging in forest canopies and hedgerows, often hanging upside-down. They also occasionally forage on larger branches, much like a nuthatch. Like many finches, they have an undulating flight and often make aerial contact calls.	Small seeds, especially thistle, red alder, birch, and spruce seeds, make up the majority of the Pine Siskin's diet.  In summer, they will eat insects, especially aphids, which they feed to the young, but seeds dominate their diet.	Common and widespread in all conifer and mixed forests throughout four-county area. Numbers and distribution vary greatly between years depending on cone crop. BBA records appear to demonstrate Pine Siskin to be most densely distributed in dry-forest zones of Kittitas County. Relatively low level of breeding confirmation could be due to preference for placement of nests high in canopy, but may also reflect sporadic nature of breeding, with nests concentrated opportunistically near favored food sources, located through erratic wanderings.	Pine Siskins are monogamous, and pairs form within winter flocks.  They may nest in loose colonies or in isolated pairs, and their breeding activity is more closely tied to the abundance of food than to season.  Nests are well hidden, on a horizontal branch well out from the trunk of a conifer tree.  The female builds a large, shallow cup of twigs, grass, bark strips, rootlets, leaves, and lichen, lined with moss, plant down, hair, and feathers.  The female incubates 3 to 4 eggs for about 13 days.  The male brings her food while she incubates, and while she broods the young for the first few days after they hatch.  After that, both parents bring food.  The young leave the nest after 13 to 17 days, and the parents continue to feed the young for about three more weeks.	Pine Siskins are generally considered resident, but they can be irruptive and nomadic, especially in winter.  Their movements are closely tied to the distribution and abundance of seeds.  When northern cone crops are small, which appears to occur about every other year, many Pine Siskins winter in Washington along the west slope of the Cascades.	pine_siskin	PISI			
109	24	Carduelis	psaltria	Lesser Goldfinch	Uncommon and local resident east.	LC	Throughout most of their range, Lesser Goldfinches are widespread and fairly common, and numbers are most likely stable.  This range has expanded in recent decades, and Washington is at its northern edge.  The first breeding record of Lesser Goldfinches in Washington was in 1975.  Lesser Goldfinches have adapted to a wide variety of foods and habitats, including those provided and modified by humans.  This adaptability has probably helped the population remain stable.	Lesser Goldfinches are small finches with bright yellow undersides.  Males have greenish-brown backs, black caps and wings with two white wing-bars, and a white patch on each wing.  Their tails are black with white patches on either side, and their undertail coverts are yellow (contrasting with the white undertail coverts of American Goldfinches).  Females lack the black cap and wing-bars of the males, are not as brightly colored, and lack the white on the tail; they do have white patches on each wing.		1	Lesser Goldfinches are typically found in dry, open woodlands.  In Washington, they are closely associated with Garry oak, especially at the brushy edges of Garry oak stands.  They are usually found in pastures, steppe, forest openings, and streamsides.	The range of the Lesser Goldfinch just barely reaches across the Columbia River into Washington.  These finches are permanent residents in Washington, and are, for the most part, restricted to Klickitat County, where they are uncommon and local.  They can be found in the Lyle area from the Klickitat River west to Catherine Creek, at Maryhill State Park, and along the eastern edge of the Columbia River Gorge.	Lesser Goldfinches are active foragers and form flocks outside of the breeding season. They often mimic short bits of other birds' songs, and like American Goldfinches, they often call in flight.	Lesser Goldfinches are primarily seedeaters and eat mostly small weed seeds, especially thistle.  They eat some small insects in the summer, particularly aphids, which they regurgitate for their young.		Lesser Goldfinches nest in loose, colonial groups of monogamous pairs.  Nests are usually located in a vertical fork or branch of a tree, surrounded by dense foliage.  The female builds the nest, which is a compact, open cup made of grass, plant fibers, and bark strips, with a lining of plant down.  The female incubates 3 to 5 eggs for 12 to 13 days.  The male brings her food while she incubates, and while she broods the young for the first few days after they hatch.  After that, both parents bring food to the young.  The young leave the nest after about two weeks, and the parents continue to feed the young for at least another week.	Throughout much of their range, Lesser Goldfinches are permanent residents.  In the coldest parts of their breeding range, they may migrate short distances southward, or from higher elevations into lowlands.  The winter range of those that do migrate is not well understood.	lesser_goldfinch				
110	24	Carduelis	tristis	American Goldfinch	Common summer resident, uncommon winter.	LC	Throughout their range, American Goldfinches are widespread and common.  The Cascades divide the two subspecies found in Washington.  In western Washington, they were formerly rare, but with European settlement and the cutting of the western Washington forests that created weedy second-growth and suburban habitat, they have become common.  Numbers recorded on Christmas Bird Counts vary from year to year, but appear to reflect an upward trend in winter populations in the Northwest.	The American Goldfinch is the state bird of Washington. It is common throughout the lowlands of Washington, often coming to bird feeders. The male in breeding plumage is bright yellow with a black forehead, wings, and tail.  He has one white wing-bar on each wing and white on his tail.  Outside of the breeding season, the male is drab brown with hints of yellow and white wing-bars.  In both breeding and non-breeding plumage, he has white undertail coverts contrasting with the yellow undertail coverts of the Lesser Goldfinch. The female in breeding plumage is yellowish-gray-brown on top and varies in color from bright yellow to dull yellow underneath.  She has two light wing-bars on each wing and a light-colored bill.  Her tail is black with white outer tips.  Outside of the breeding season, she is gray above and below, and has less distinct wing-bars and a darker bill.		1	American Goldfinches can generally be found in brushy and weedy habitats at the edges of fields, rivers, and hedgerows, especially when thistle is present.  Suburban gardens, poplar plantations, orchards, and other brushy areas with scattered deciduous trees are commonly used.	American Goldfinches are common from mid-April to mid-October in appropriate habitat throughout Washington's lowlands.  They are generally present in these same areas in winter, but are much less common.  They are more common in winter east of the Cascades than west, especially along the Columbia and Snake Rivers.  In winter, they are less common along the outer coast than elsewhere in Washington.  They breed below 500 feet on the outer coast, below 1,000 feet in the Puget Trough, and below 2,000 feet along major river valleys in northeastern Washington.	Flocks are common outside of the breeding season, and American Goldfinches often flock with redpolls and Pine Siskins. They are active foragers, and climb about nimbly when foraging, often hanging from seed-heads and other objects.  Like many finches, American Goldfinches have an undulating flight.  They often give call notes on the upward strokes	Small seeds, especially thistle, make up the majority of the American Goldfinch's diet.  In the summer, they eat some insects, especially aphids, but seeds dominate their diet. They feed regurgitated seeds to their young.	Common at low and moderate elevations in clearcuts, burns, grasslands, weedy woodland edges, and agricultural habitats on both sides of Cascades. Clearing of forests has increased habitat in western counties, as has conversion of lands to agricultural uses in Kittitas County. Fairly scarce in shrub-steppe, and not recorded from much of predicted range in eastern Kittitas County mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Thistles favored food source in disturbed habitats. The few high-elevation records may represent upslope wanderers. Washington subspecies are <i>C.t. pallidus</i> east of Cascade crest, <i>C.t. jewetti</i> to west.	American Goldfinches breed later in the summer than most songbirds. Their breeding is timed to coincide with the peak abundance of thistle seed.  They often nest in loose colonies.  The nest is located in an upright fork of a shrub, tree, or occasionally a dense weed.  The female builds a tightly woven, compact cup of plant fibers and spider webs and lines it with thistle-down.  The female incubates 4 to 6 eggs for 12 to 14 days.  The male brings her food while she incubates, and while she broods the young for the first few days after they hatch.  After that, both parents bring food to the young.  The young leave the nest after 12 to 17 days, but the parents continue to feed the young for a few weeks.  American Goldfinches generally raise one or two broods each year.	Many southern US populations of American Goldfinch are resident, but northern populations migrate.  They migrate by day in flocks, and many of Washington's breeders leave the state in winter.  Wintering flocks often wander about nomadically in search of food.	american_goldfinch	AMGO			
111	24	Carpodacus	cassinii	Cassin's Finch	Common summer resident east, uncommon winter.	NT	A preference for open forests allows Cassin's Finches to take advantage of selectively logged forests and small-scale clear-cutting operations.  As this habitat has been developed or converted to agriculture, however, House Finches have expanded and may outcompete Cassin's Finches.	The Cassin's Finch is closely related to the Purple Finch and the House Finch, and there are places in Washington where all three species can be found.  Like most finches, the Cassin's Finch has a notched tail.  The male Cassin's Finch typically has a brown back and wings, with pinkish over-wash and white belly.  His brightest coloring is on his crown.  This bright spot contrasts with the relatively pale areas surrounding it and is a good field mark.  The female Cassin's Finch has short, crisp streaks on her breast.  The breast streaks do not gather in a central spot as on many sparrows. The female may also exhibit a faint whitish eyebrow. Unlike Purple Finches, Cassin's Finches have fine streaks on their undertail coverts.  Their bills are conical and slightly longer than those of Purple Finches.  Males take two years to reach mature plumage, and one-year males look like females.		1	Cassin's Finches inhabit dry, open coniferous forests east of the Cascade crest.  They are most common in mid-elevation Ponderosa pine forests but can also be found in Douglas fir, spruce, or fir forests.	Cassin's Finches can be found in eastern Washington from May to October.  Small numbers remain in eastern Washington in winter. A few are reported on the west side, but identification difficulties make these reports uncertain.  Cassin's Finches tend to be found at higher elevations than Purple Finches, but all three (Cassin's, Purple, and House Finch) can be seen in eastern Washington where agriculture, pine forests, and rivers all come together.  Although Cassin's Finches are generally widespread in eastern Washington, their occurrence in any given location is highly variable from year to year.	Flocks form in late summer and early fall, and groups may visit bird feeders regularly in winter.  Cassin's Finches can often be found in association with crossbills and other mountain birds. They forage in trees (especially when the ground is covered with snow), in weedy growth and shrubbery, and also on the ground. They can erect their crown feathers and do this more often than the closely related Purple Finch.	Cassin's Finches eat mostly seeds, buds, and berries.  In summer they also eat insects, but feed their young mostly seeds.	Common and widespread in Kittitas County forest zones, except for densest, wettest forest immediately below Cascade crest. Most concentrated in dry, open forests of ponderosa pine and interior Douglas-fir zones. BBA records extend to ponderosa pine/shrub-steppe ecotone in Yakima Canyon between Manastash Ridge and Umtanum Ridge, where predicted range not mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Uncommon at scattered locations on and just west of Cascade crest in King County.	Monogamous pairs typically form in late winter or early spring, and groups may breed semi-colonially.  They usually nest in a large conifer, near the top of the crown, or well out on a lateral branch.  The female builds the nest, which is a loose, open cup made of twigs, weeds, and rootlets, lined with fine grass, plant fibers, hair, and lichen.  The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for about 12 days.  The male brings food to the female while she incubates, and both adults bring food to the chicks.  The young leave the nest after about two weeks, and the parents and young may quickly leave the nesting area, but will remain in family groups.  Pairs generally raise a single brood each season.	Cassin's Finches are short-distance migrants.  During winter some drift southward, others descend into nearby lowlands, and others remain on the breeding range.  Most Cassin's Finches leave Washington in winter, except when heavy Ponderosa pine seed crops provide enough food for them to stay.  They may be somewhat nomadic during winter.	cassins_finch				
112	24	Carpodacus	mexicanus	House Finch	Common resident.	LC	House Finches are native to the southwestern United States and Mexico, but through natural and artificial range expansion, they are now abundant throughout North America.  House Finches first expanded into the Columbia Basin from points south in 1885. They were introduced in the eastern United States when illegal caged birds were released in New York in 1940.  Facilitated by dam construction and the conversion of steppe habitat to irrigated agriculture, they slowly expanded their range in Washington through the early 20th Century.  They first arrived in western Washington in the 1950s, and are now common throughout the state, with significant yearly increases recorded by the Breeding Bird Survey since 1966.  In human-altered settings, this finch outcompetes its close relatives, the Cassin's Finch and the Purple Finch. Its presence has been considered to be a major cause of the Purple Finch's decline in western Washington.	The House Finch is closely related to the Cassin's Finch and the Purple Finch, and in fact, there are places in Washington where all three species can be found.  All three species are streaked, and the males of all three have red plumage.  The House Finch, the most common and widespread of the three, typically has a red head, breast, and rump, but does not have red coloring on its brown back or wings. This helps to differentiate it from the other two.  Female House Finches have blurrier streaks and grayer undersides than the other two species.  The breast streaks do not converge in a central spot as on many sparrows.  They lack clear white stripes on their heads.  House Finches have longer tails and appear more slender overall, and also have slightly curved bills, in contrast to the straight bills found in the other two species.  Like most finches, they have notched tails.  There is considerable color variation among males, from pale yellow, to orange with bright red, this being the most common.  Many but not all males reach mature plumage in their first year. The variation in color is related to diet.		1	House Finches are native to open and desert habitats, but have expanded their range, naturally and through introductions, and now can be found in almost any kind of human-altered habitat.  They prefer edge habitat and are absent from dense coniferous forests.	House Finches are common year round in human-altered areas throughout Washington.  They are typically absent from montane forests and open, non-agricultural range.  Their distribution is strongly correlated with the presence of bird feeders.	Flocks of House Finches are common at bird feeders during the non-breeding season.  Some flocks may stay together through the breeding season as well, and birds will use bird feeders year round.  They often forage on the ground, but also perch on weeds, shrubs, or trees.  Both males and females may sing during the breeding season, and males sing year round.	The vast majority of the House Finch's diet is vegetable matter--seeds, buds, berries, and nectar.  They feed their young regurgitated seeds.  They eat a few small insects, especially aphids, but are primarily seed- and fruit-eaters at all times of the year.	Common at lower elevations in western counties in variety of open habitats in proximity to cities, suburbs, towns, and farmlands; also occurs in more-or-less natural areas adjacent to altered habitats, but not in large forest tracts. Common at low and moderate elevation in Kittitas County in similar habitats. BBA records extend somewhat farther west along Yakima River and more extensively into steppe zone and along Columbia River than reflected in predicted range mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	House Finches are monogamous, and pairs tend to form while the birds are in their winter flocks.  Some pairs may stay together year round.  They choose a wide variety of nesting sites, and will nest in man-made objects such as window ledges and holes in buildings.  Ivy growing on buildings or trees creates many nesting sites.  Nests may also be located in conifer trees, hanging planters, and old nests of other birds.  The first requirement is a solid base with some overhanging material.  The female builds most of the nest, which is an open cup of grass, weeds, twigs, leaves, and rootlets, lined with feathers and other fine material.  The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 13 to 14 days while the male brings her food.  The female broods the young for the first few days after they hatch, and the male continues to bring food.  The female then joins the male in bringing food to the young.  The young leave the nest after 12 to 15 days and may be fed by the male for about two more weeks, while the female starts a second clutch.  Pairs may raise three or more broods each season.	Throughout their range, many House Finch populations migrate, either short distances latitudinally or altitudinally.  Before 1945, populations of House Finches in the Okanogan Valley migrated south, but since 1945, House Finches in this area have been resident.	house_finch	HOFI			
113	24	Carpodacus	purpureus	Purple Finch	Fairly common resident, mostly west.	LC	The introduction of House Finches in the eastern United States in the early 20th Century appears to have caused a decline in Purple Finch populations in that part of the country.  House Finches have also replaced Purple Finches in many developed areas of Washington, and Purple Finches have experienced significant annual declines statewide since 1980.  They were formerly common in Seattle, but have rarely been recorded in Seattle's Christmas Bird Count in recent years.	The Purple Finch is closely related to the Cassin's Finch and the House Finch, and in fact, there are places in Washington where all three species can be found.  All three species are streaked, and the males of all three have red plumage.  Male Purple Finches typically have brown undertones on their backs and wings, but are reddish-purple overall (with the exception of their white bellies), with the brightest coloring on their breasts and heads.  Female Purple Finches are heavily marked with short, blurry streaks on their breasts and have white markings on their faces.  The breast streaks do not converge in a central spot as on many sparrows.  Unlike the House and Cassin's Finches, Purple Finches typically lack streaks on their undertail coverts.  Purple Finches have short, notched tails and straight bills, although not as straight as those of the Cassin's Finch.  Males take two years to reach mature plumage, and first-year males look like females.		1	Purple Finches are generally found in moist coniferous and mixed-forest lowlands, especially those with many openings and edges, and an abundant understory.  They are often found in revegetating clear-cuts, on farmland, and in rural residential areas.  They tend to avoid large mature forests and are outcompeted by House Finches in suburban and urban areas.  In wetter western Washington, they can be found in most forest types, but in eastern Washington they are mostly restricted to wetlands and irrigated orchards. During migration and winter, they use a broad range of forested and semi-open habitats.	Purple Finches are primarily a western Washington species, where they are common and widespread in undeveloped areas.  They can also be found in smaller numbers on the east slope of the Cascades and along central Washington river valleys.	Small flocks form in late summer and early fall, and groups may visit bird feeders regularly in     winter, when those feeders are not dominated by House Sparrows or House Finches.  They usually forage on the outer portion of tree branches at various heights, and occasionally on the ground.	Purple Finches eat mostly seeds, buds, and berries.  In summer, they will also eat insects, but feed their young mostly seeds.	In western counties, fairly common at lower elevations, uncommon and local at moderate elevations, utilizing open habitats adjacent to forest such as clearcuts, farmland, and semi-rural residential development. Now nearly absent as breeder in urban and suburban King County, where disappearance over last half-century often ascribed to competition with House Finch (Smith et al. 1997). Decline in Puget lowlands continues beyond close of atlas period as development intensifies. In Kittitas County, locally fairly common in dry-forest zones at moderate elevation, around towns, woodland edges, farmland, and riparian vegetation. Usually absent from closed-canopy, contiguous conifer forest anywhere in four-county area.	Monogamous pairs usually nest on a horizontal branch or in the fork of a conifer tree, typically well out from the trunk.  The female builds the nest, which is a compact, open cup made of twigs, weeds, and rootlets, and lined with fine grass, hair,and moss.  The female incubates 3 to 5 eggs for 12 to 13 days.  The male brings food to the female while she incubates, and both adults bring food to the chicks.  The young leave the nest after 13 to 16 days.  The young can fly weakly when they first fledge and stay close to the nest for at least two more weeks before dispersing.  Pairs generally raise two broods each season.	Flocks of Purple Finches undertake a drawn out migration in both the fall and spring.  In much of the eastern United States, Purple Finches are short-distance migrants, wintering in points south of their breeding range.  Western Purple Finches are very uncommon in winter in Puget Sound, but large numbers move through in spring.  They undergo almost cyclical irruptions across portions of their winter range, which may be associated with conifer seed crops.	purple_finch	PUFI			
114	13	Cathartes	aura	Turkey Vulture	Fairly common summer resident.	LC	The status of the Turkey Vulture population can be difficult to determine. They may travel great distances each day, and are often clumped at roost sites. Turkey Vultures can accumulate pesticides and other contaminants, which are a potential threat to their population. Other threats include accidental trapping, collisions with cars, electrocution, shooting, and lead ingestion from eating animals that were shot. They were formerly persecuted in agricultural areas because they were suspected of spreading livestock diseases such as anthrax and of preying on young animals. Since it is now understood that these suspicions are groundless, much of the persecution has ceased. Turkey Vultures have benefited from their adaptability in diet and nest sites, and their population appears to be stable or increasing.	The most widely distributed vulture in the New World, the Turkey Vulture is a large, predominantly blackish-brown bird. It is most commonly seen soaring overhead. The Turkey Vulture has a 5- to 6-foot wingspan and soars with its wings tilted up, in a dihedral pattern. Turkey Vultures rock back and forth when soaring. The underwings are two-toned: silvery flight feathers with black wing-linings. The undertail is also light. Juveniles have gray heads while newly hatched birds have black heads. When the birds are soaring, it is difficult to see the color of the head. The rocking, as well as the dihedral pattern, distinguishes the Turkey Vulture in flight from other large, soaring birds. Perched, adult Turkey Vultures are unmistakable, with their featherless, red heads.		1	Turkey Vultures can be seen soaring over a broad variety of habitats. They are most often found above open country, especially within a few miles of rocky or wooded areas. Rocky outcroppings, cliffs, and dry forests provide nesting sites, while open areas are prime foraging habitat.	Turkey Vultures can be seen soaring over a wide range of habitats throughout Washington from February to October. In western Washington they can often be seen in the Snoqualmie Valley (King County) and in the Willapa Hills (Pacific County). Wintering birds are rare throughout Washington. During migration they are most common through the Puget Trough area; east of the mountains their migration is on a broad front. Breeding Turkey Vultures are found in the lower forest regions in the western Cascades and are common in the lower forest and adjacent steppe along the eastern Cascades. They are uncommon in the northeastern corner of Washington. Migrants are seldom seen in the Blue Mountains, and breeders have not been reported there. Turkey vultures are uncommon along the outer coast, but probably breed there in small numbers as they do in the foothills of the Olympic Mountains. Turkey Vultures are uncommon to rare in the drier portions of the Columbia Basin, even as migrants.	Unlike most birds, Turkey Vultures have a well-developed sense of smell. As they soar over foraging areas, they scan the ground, searching for carrion or scavengers that might signal the presence of something dead. When they locate food, they eat it in place. They usually forage alone, but sometimes congregate around food sources. In the Pacific Northwest, they roost communally in small groups. In the eastern US, several thousand birds may nest in the same area.	Turkey Vultures are scavengers, eating nearly any carrion they find. They prefer fresh carrion and appear to specialize in small food items, especially where their range overlaps with the dominant Black Vulture, a species that does not occur in Washington. They cannot open large carcasses.	Common in dry forests of western Kittitas County, with strong concentration at middle elevations near Easton and Cle Elum. Very few Columbia Plateau records, likely representing non-breeders. In King County, absent from developed lowlands and high Cascades but fairly common in rural river valleys and foothills, with greatest densities in Green, White, and Greenwater drainages. Present in forested southwestern Kitsap County but no BBA records from rest of county and few from Island County. BBA observers almost never confirmed breeding for Turkey Vultures due to this species' preference for nesting on remote, inaccessible rocky cliffs.	It is not known when Turkey Vultures first form pair bonds and breed, but they do form long-term bonds. Pair formation includes a ritualized display with several birds in a circle on the ground, hopping up and down with wings partly spread. Nests are located in sheltered areas, such as hollow trees or logs, in cliffs, caves, dense thickets, old buildings, or any secluded area isolated from humans. They build little or no nest and lay 1 to 3 eggs on the ground or the bottom of the nest area. Both male and female help incubate the eggs for about 28 days; both have brood patches. Once hatched, the nestlings are brooded almost continuously for the first five days. The male and female take turns brooding the young, allowing one parent to collect food that it then regurgitates for the young. The young first begin to fly at about nine or ten weeks. The fledging process is gradual and varies depending on nest location. Birds fledging from lower sites have the luxury of taking short practice flights for a few days before taking extended flights. The first flight of young birds that hatch in exposed or elevated nests will generally be extended, since short hops are sometimes too risky for them. Once the young begin to fly, they generally spend 1 to 3 more weeks at the nest site, taking advantage of the food provided by their parents.	Turkey Vultures are considered partial migrants. Those birds that breed north of the wintering grounds usually migrate. Many birds from Vancouver Island, British Columbia and northward gather at the southern tip of the island in late summer. Once gathered at this staging area, large groups of up to 400 birds travel across the Strait of Juan de Fuca to the Olympic Peninsula, and then southward on to California and South America. Their final destination is unclear. They begin returning to Washington in February.	turkey_vulture	TUVU			
115	67	Catharus	fuscescens	Veery	Fairly common resident east.	LC	Loss of habitat on wintering grounds in South America is of concern for the future of the Veery. In Washington, habitat loss is also a concern. Veeries are susceptible to nest parasitism by Brown-headed Cowbirds, and forest fragmentation increases the likelihood of this parasitism. In British Columbia, nearly 25% of Veery nests found had been parasitized by cowbirds.	There are three species of spot-breasted thrushes found in Washington. All three'the Veery, the Hermit Thrush, and the Swainson's Thrush'have solid brownish upperparts (back, wings, and tail), light-colored bellies, whitish eye-rings, and varying degrees of spotting on their breasts. All are similar in shape to a robin, but smaller. Males and females appear similar in most species. Of the three Washington thrushes, the Veery has the palest flanks (gray) and is the most faintly spotted. The eye-ring is less distinct than that of the Swainson's or Hermit Thrush.		1	The Veery's habitat is more restricted than that of the other two spot-breasted thrushes in Washington. They are found in eastern Washington in hardwood and mixed forests with a dense, leafy understory near water, especially creek bottoms. Willow, alder, and cottonwood stands bordering streams or beaver ponds are prime Veery habitat.  In other parts of the US, they use a wider variety of moist habitats.	Although they can be hard to find, and are most often heard and not seen, Veeries are common in hardwood riparian areas at low elevations in eastern Washington. These areas include south to central Yakima County and Klickitat County. They are also found in the Blue Mountains, and the Methow and Okanogan Valleys along the east central Cascades, and in the northeast portion of the state. In western Washington, they nest in small numbers along the Skagit River in Whatcom County.	Spending much of their time on the ground, Veeries forage by flipping over dead leaves with their bills and looking for food underneath. They hover to glean insects from foliage and make short flights to catch flying insects.	Berries and insects make up the majority of the Veery's diet. Insects are the primary food source during the breeding season. In late summer and fall, the diet shifts to berries, and consequently, the birds move higher to forage.	Fairly common in hardwood riparian habitats at moderate elevations within Kittitas County lower forest zones. Frequent in dense riparian thickets in ponderosa pine/shrub steppe ecotone, where heard but seldom seen. Not recorded west of Cascade crest in our area. Returns late in spring (late May), departs before September; rarely recorded in migration.	The male chooses a nesting territory which he defends from other males, and attracts females by singing. The female builds a nest either on the ground, or low to the ground at the base of a shrub or sapling, less than 5 feet high. If the nest is on the ground, it is usually built against a stump or a log or in a clump of grass or weeds. The nest is an open cup, built on a foundation of dead leaves. It is built from weeds, twigs, and bark fibers. The female incubates the 4 eggs alone. Once the young hatch, she continues to brood them. The male gathers food, which he passes to the female who feeds the young. The young grow quickly, and leave the nest 10-12 days after hatching.	Veeries are Neotropical migrants, spending the winters in South America in tropical rainforest undergrowth. They migrate mostly at night, and the males arrive on the breeding territory ahead of the females, ranging from the end of April and early May to early June. Veeries begin to leave the breeding territory in mid-August, and most birds are gone by the end of August. Washington birds appear to migrate east before turning south and migrating across the Gulf of Mexico.	veery				
116	67	Catharus	guttatus	Hermit Thrush	Fairly common summer resident. Uncommon to rare winter.	LC	There are at least two, and perhaps as many as four, subspecies of Hermit Thrush in Washington. One subspecies is found in the Blue Mountains, a second in the Cascades, and what may possibly be a third in the Olympics. The subspecies found in the northeast corner of the state has yet to be identified. Hermit Thrushes are less dependent on wintering habitat in the tropics than are the other thrushes, which may be one reason the population is doing as well as it is. Another reason may be that it nests at higher elevations where habitat is more stable.	There are three species of spot-breasted thrushes found in Washington. All three' the Hermit Thrush, the Swainson's Thrush, and the Veery'have solid brownish upperparts (back, wings, and tail), light-colored bellies, whitish eye-rings, and varying degrees of spotting on their breasts. All are similar in shape to a robin, but smaller. Males and females appear similar in most species. The Hermit Thrush's tail and rump are a shade redder than the rest of its brown upperparts. The spots on its breast are solid black, darker than those of the other two thrushes, and it is more heavily spotted, with the spots beginning to run together. The eye-ring is easier to see than that of the Veery, and is white in contrast to the buff-colored eye-ring of the Swainson's Thrush.		1	The Hermit Thrush is one of the most widely distributed forest-nesting, migratory birds in North America. It is found in coniferous and mixed woodlands in the nesting season, and found in other woodlands during winter and migration. In comparison to the Veery and the Swainson's Thrush, it is found at higher elevations and in more open habitat.	Hermit Thrushes are common at high elevations in coniferous forests throughout Washington. They usually replace Swainson's Thrushes at high elevations in the Cascade and Olympic Mountains, although they are less common in the wetter forests of the Olympic Peninsula. During migration, they are often found at lower elevations than when breeding. They are outnumbered by Swainson's Thrushes throughout most of Washington, except at high elevations in coniferous forests with limited brush, such as in the Blue Mountains.	Hermit Thrushes do much of their foraging on the ground, hopping along, picking food up from the leaf litter or soil. They sing from high perches in isolated trees. The Hermit Thrush has an ethereal, unforgettable, fluted song.	Like the other spot-breasted thrushes, the Hermit Thrush eats a combination of insects and berries. Insects and other small invertebrates are the primary diet during the breeding season, while berries and other fruit become more important in the winter.	Common in coniferous forests in King and Kittitas Counties at moderate to high elevations (1,500 feet and higher, mostly above 2,000 feet). Prefers forests with more-open understory than Swainson's Thrush.	The male chooses a nesting territory and sings to defend it and to attract a mate. The female builds the nest, which is a bulky, well-made cup of moss, weeds, and twigs, lined with a variety of soft material. The nest is typically in a conifer tree, 3-12 feet off the ground. The female incubates 4 eggs and broods the young once they hatch.  The male gathers most of the food for the young, and the female feeds it to them. The pair will often raise two broods in a season.	The Hermit Thrush is the only spot-breasted thrush likely to be seen in the United States in the winter. Those that do migrate arrive earlier in the spring (March-May) and leave later in the fall (September-October) than the other thrushes. These birds migrate mostly at night and spend the winter in the southern part of the United States through Mexico to Guatemala. Non-migratory birds can be found rarely in the lowlands of Washington throughout the winter.	hermit_thrush	HETH			
117	67	Catharus	minimus	Gray-cheeked Thrush		LC		One October record, from McNary NWR (Benton County).		1								gray-cheeked_thrush				
118	67	Catharus	ustulatus	Swainson's Thrush	Common summer resident.	LC	Two subspecies of Swainson's Thrush occur in Washington, the russet-backed form in western Washington and the southeast Cascades, and the olive-backed form found in eastern Washington and the northeast Cascades. Swainson's Thrushes appear to benefit from the extensive logging of low-elevation west-side forests because logging leaves brushy, early-successional habitat. They are currently the most abundant and widely distributed spot-breasted thrush in Washington. They are, however, still vulnerable to loss of habitat on breeding and wintering grounds. The Breeding Bird Survey shows a small, not statistically significant decline in the Washington population between 1980 and 2002.	There are three species of spot-breasted thrushes found in Washington. All three - the Swainson's Thrush, the Veery, and the Hermit Thrush - have solid brownish upperparts (back, wings, and tail), light-colored bellies, whitish eye-rings, and varying degrees of spotting on their breasts. All are similar in shape to a robin, but smaller. Males and females appear similar in most species.  The spots on the Swainson's Thrush appear more faded than those of the Hermit Thrush, but more distinct than those of the Veery. Swainson's Thrushes also have distinct buff-colored eye-rings.		1	The Swainson's Thrush occupies forested habitat at low to mid-elevations, overlapping with the Veery below and the Hermit Thrush above. Although it is found mostly in dense hardwood and mixed forests, young conifer forests, and forest openings, the Swainson's Thrush does not require as dense an understory as does the Veery. They are attracted to salmonberry stands as nesting sites.	Swainson's Thrushes are common in forested regions throughout the state, especially at low to moderate elevations in western Washington. They are abundant in early-successional shrub habitats and in salmonberry thickets. East of the Cascades, they are found at higher elevations than in the west, because eastern forests are more open, and have more understory, than the dense, west-side forests. Spring migrants appear in late May in eastern Washington.	Although the Swainson's Thrush does much of its feeding on the ground, it spends more time foraging in trees than do the other spot-breasted thrushes in Washington. They hover while gleaning insects from foliage, and also catch flying insects. In spring and summer, when they feed predominantly on insects and other invertebrates, they forage mostly on the ground. As the season progresses and they eat more berries, they forage farther off the ground. The song and call of the Swainson's Thrush are quite distinctive, and may help a birder to locate this thrush that usually stays under cover.	The diet of the Swainson's Thrush changes seasonally from insects to berries. Berries are important year round, making up over one third of the summer diet.	Common and ubiquitous in western counties, especially at low to moderate elevations but occurring right up to Cascade crest. Found in all forested regions as well as residential areas and wooded parks with sufficient brush; particularly associated with thickets of salmonberry and other native shrubs. Some BBA records from marginal urban habitat may represent migrants, since species moves well into June and begins fall dispersal before August. Fairly common in Kittitas County at moderate and high elevations, preferring moist forests generally above those occupied by Veery but with substantial overlap. Absent from agricultural lands of Kittitas Valley and from shrub-steppe.	The male establishes a territory and attracts a mate by singing. The female builds the nest on a horizontal branch of a deciduous tree or shrub 2-10 feet above the ground. The nest is a bulky, open cup of twigs, bark strips, moss, grass, leaves, and mud. It is lined with fine, soft materials including animal hair and lichen. The female lays 3 to 4 eggs, which she incubates by herself. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest 10 to 13 days after hatching.	Swainson's Thrushes are highly migratory, and none winter in Washington. They arrive late in spring, and migration is spread out, with spring migrants appearing in late May in eastern Washington. Fall migration takes place during August and September. Migration is mostly at night.  The birds migrate to tropical forests for the winter.	swainsons_thrush	SWTH			
119	66	Catherpes	mexicanus	Canyon Wren	Fairly common and local resident east.	LC	The rocky habitat of the Canyon Wren is not well represented in the Breeding Bird Survey, so long-term trends are difficult to determine, although there is some indication of a recent decline.  Canyon Wrens are currently common within their habitat, although their range is limited and patchily distributed, which could make recovery difficult if they were to decline significantly.	The Canyon Wren has a distinctive, clear, white throat patch that stands out against its reddish-brown body.  Its back is speckled with light markings, and its tail is barred with black.  Its head is gray, and its long bill curves down slightly.		1	More restricted in habitat than the other steppe-zone wren, the Rock Wren, the Canyon Wren is found almost exclusively in steep canyons and large boulder fields that are associated with the moving water of streams and rivers, or with large wetlands that do not go dry during the summer.	An eastern Washington species, Canyon Wrens are rare in western Washington.  There are no known nesting records on the western side of the state, although Canyon Wrens have been recorded nesting in Pierce, Whatcom, and Pacific Counties.  In the deep canyons of eastern Washington's steppe zone, and at low elevations on the eastern slope of the Cascades, Canyon Wrens are fairly common.  Associated with streams and rivers, Canyon Wrens are known to breed in canyons and coulees on the Columbia, Okanogan, Snake, Spokane, Yakima, and Grande Ronde Rivers.  They can be found on cliffs in Oak Creek and Selah Canyons in Yakima County; Rock Creek, Rowland, and Locke Lakes in Klickitat County; the Spokane River in Spokane County; and on the cliffs near the Walla Walla River delta (Walla Walla County).  In Grant County, they nest in rocks adjacent to wetlands at Lake Lenore, Soap Lake, and the Columbia National Wildlife Refuge.	The Canyon Wren's long bill and flat head enable it to reach deep into crevices to find prey.  While foraging, it hops around in and out of rock piles. The Canyon Wren's beautiful descending song is unique and memorable.	Insects and spiders make up the majority of the Canyon Wren diet.	Uncommon and local in deep, rocky canyons of Yakima and Columbia Rivers. Two possible records from rocky areas west of Ellensburg disjunct from core range. Record of 28 March 1999 from Thorp Prairie most likely of bird still on winter range, but another from late May in North Riggs Canyon vicinity hints at confirmation of Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) predictions of breeding in lower Manastash Valley/upper Umtanum Creek.	Male Canyon Wrens defend their territories and attract females by singing.  The monogamous pair bond may hold throughout the year and extend into multiple nesting seasons.  Both male and female build the nest, which is usually in a hole or crevice in the rocks.  They start with a foundation of twigs, bark, and other coarse items, then build a cup of softer materials such as grass, moss, spider webs, and hair.  The female incubates the clutch of eggs, which can vary from 4 to 6, but usually consists of 5 eggs.  Incubation lasts for 12 to 18 days.  Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at about 15 days, but may remain near the parents for several more weeks.	Canyon Wrens are permanent residents in Washington, although in winter they may move away from cliffs into dense vegetation especially along streams, and to lower elevations.  They are sensitive to low temperatures, and in years with severe winters, their numbers may decline.	canyon_wren				
120	46	Centrocercus	urophasianus	Greater Sage-Grouse	Rare resident east.	NT	Greater Sage-Grouse are declining in Washington and in other parts of their range, and are listed as threatened by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and as a species of special concern by the US Fish and Wildlife Service.  Sage-Grouse were formerly found throughout the central Columbia Basin in areas of healthy sagebrush.  Much of this sagebrush has been converted to agriculture or degraded by overgrazing.  Sage-Grouse have now disappeared from much of their former range, currently occupying 8-10% of their historic range.  In 1997, the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife estimated that there were 900-1000 Greater Sage-Grouse left in Washington, divided into two isolated populations.  One population is mostly located on private land in Douglas and Grant Counties, and the other is located on the Yakima Army Training Center grounds.  Since the entire population in the state is restricted to these two spots, they are at serious risk to catastrophic fire, intensive grazing, military training impacts, inbreeding, and continued conversion of sagebrush to agriculture.  The Conservation Reserve Program helps set aside habitat for Sage-Grouse on private land, and the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife is currently researching habitat requirements of Greater Sage-Grouse in order to learn how best to protect them in the future.  Protection and revegetation efforts have had some success, and the Douglas County population has increased since 1992.  A state population as small as 1000 birds, distributed across only two isolated groups, is still at serious risk, and continued protection and habitat restoration are required to safeguard the future of the Greater Sage-Grouse.	The largest grouse in North America, the Greater Sage-Grouse, is brownish-gray with white patterning.  It has a long, spiky, pointed tail and a black belly.  The male has a white breast and prominent yellow eyebrows. During the breeding season, groups of males do their courtship display together, puffing out air sacs in their chest and spreading their tails.		1	Greater Sage-Grouse are found in shrub-steppe and meadow-steppe habitats.  They are typically found in areas with low, rolling hills adjacent to valleys.  They prefer medium-density sagebrush mixed with a variety of other plants.	Greater Sage-Grouse formerly ranged from the Columbia River, north to Oroville, west to the foothills of the Cascades, and east to the Spokane River.  A population of about 600 birds is located in Douglas and Grant Counties, on mostly private land. The Yakima Army Training Center in Kittitas and Yakima Counties has another population consisting of 300-400 birds.	Male Sage-Grouse gather together in the spring to display on a common breeding ground, or lek, where the females come to choose mates.  They strut around with their tails spread, repeatedly filling and emptying their air sacs with a large booming sound, which can be heard from over a mile away.  Greater Sage-Grouse get around by walking most of the time, although they are strong fliers for short distances.  They are not fast runners and will typically hide or fly when threatened.	Greater Sage-Grouse forage on the ground year round; their winter staple is sagebrush leaves.  At other times of the year, they eat flowers and buds from a variety of plants. In the summer, insects are also part of their diet, especially favored by the young. Unlike other grouse, they do not eat many hard seeds.	Records generalized to full township/ranges; true population density may be thinner than symbolized. Uncommon and declining in sagebrush lands in eastern Kittitas County. Now mostly reduced to remnant breeding population on U.S. Army's Yakima Training Center, although occasionally still reported farther north (including one confirmed BBA record from Quilomene Wildlife Area in 1989).	Females select a male from the lek, they mate, and the male rejoins the lek while the female leaves the lek to find a nesting site.  She builds a nest on the ground under sagebrush or a clump of grass.  The nest is a shallow depression lined with a bit of plant material.  She lays 7-9 eggs.  Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest and find their own food, although the female continues to tend them.	Greater Sage-Grouse are permanent residents in the sagebrush country of Washington.  They may make small, seasonal movements into the lowlands in winter.	greater_sage-grouse				
121	5	Cepphus	columba	Pigeon Guillemot	Fairly common resident coast.	LC	The population of Pigeon Guillemots in Washington is not well known, and has probably declined in recent decades. They are highly vulnerable to oil spills and other pollution, changing water temperatures, introduced mammals on nesting islands, and gill-nets. Numbers fluctuate from year to year. Significant increases were seen on the colony at Protection Island from 1976-1984, but that colony has declined dramatically from 3,000 pairs in 1993 to only 1,967 pairs in 1995. A conservative estimate puts the total number of birds in Washington during the breeding season at about 4,000 birds, although some estimates are closer to 6,000. Since they are not tightly clustered on a few breeding colonies, Pigeon Guillemots are less vulnerable than many alcid species to localized disturbances. In the absence of reliable population estimates however, the conservation status of this species is difficult to ascertain.	Pigeon Guillemots are stocky birds with rounded wings and bodies and straight bills. In breeding plumage, adults are solid black with white wing patches. Non-breeding adults and juveniles have white bellies and are mottled gray-and-white above. In all plumages, the birds have bright red feet.		1	Pigeon Guillemots are found along rocky shores and inshore waters along the Pacific coast from Alaska to California. During the breeding season, they can be found on rocky islands and mainland cliffs that are protected from predators, as well as on a variety of man-made structures. In the water, they are usually close to rocky shorelines where the water is 30-90 feet deep.	Pigeon Guillemots are common year round along Washington's rocky coastline and in Puget Sound. They are more common and widespread in winter. They nest throughout the salt-water coastlines of Washington in practically every small island or coastline habitat throughout the state. Larger colonies are found in San Juan, Jefferson, Island, and Clallam Counties, and smaller colonies and single pairs are found throughout Puget Sound.	Pigeon Guillemots forage by diving and swimming underwater, propelled mostly by their wings, but, unlike most alcids, they also use their feet for propulsion. They forage by searching the bottom, diving up to 150 feet. They can also sometimes be seen on the surface of the water swimming with their heads submerged. They often sit on rocks with fish held crosswise between their bills until they swallow them.	Small fish and a variety of other aquatic creatures, including mollusks and crustaceans, make up the Pigeon Guillemot's diet.	Locally common on salwater shorelines, especially in Island County where confirmed at many locations including Smith Island. Breeding confirmed in Kitsap County from both Hood Canal and Puget Sound shores. Although less common in King County, confirmed even on downtown Seattle waterfront. For nesting utilizes wharves, piers, and crevices between boulders on jetties. In our area nests frequently in natural burrows in high bluffs, which they are capable of excavating (Dawson 1909).	The nesting practices of Pigeon Guillemots vary from those of other alcids. They regularly lay two eggs, rather than one, and, while they will nest in loose colonies, they also nest singly. Birds do not breed until they are 3-5 years old. The male chooses the site in a crevice or cave, among boulders, under driftwood, or in a man-made structure such as a wharf or pipe. The pair may excavate their own nest, or use the abandoned burrow of another animal. Nest sites are reused from year to year. The nest is a shallow scrape in a pile of soil, pebbles, or shell scraps. Both parents incubate the eggs for about four weeks. Both parents feed the young until they leave the nest at about 4-6 weeks after hatching. When the young leave the nest, they can swim and dive, but they cannot fly well for another two or three weeks.	Washington's breeding population of Pigeon Guillemots does not appear to migrate. However, more birds are present in Puget Sound in the winter, and these birds may have migrated north from farther south.	pigeon_guillemot	PIGU			
122	5	Cerorhinca	monocerata	Rhinoceros Auklet	Common summer, uncommon winter coast.	LC	Although the Rhinoceros Auklet is the second most abundant breeding seabird (excluding gulls) in Washington, making up 23.6% of the breeding seabird population, numbers vary considerably from year to year, as this species is very sensitive to disturbance during the nesting period. Adults will readily desert their nests if disturbed during the incubation or brooding periods. In addition, burrows are often near the surface and collapse easily if trod upon. Rhinoceros Auklets are also vulnerable to gill-nets, oil spills, predators, and climatic events such as El Niño. The population on Protection Island, one of the major colonies in the state, declined dramatically in the early 1990s, perhaps due to increased competition with Double-crested Cormorants. There are some indications that the population is increasing on the West Coast, but there is no evidence of significant new colonies being formed in Washington.	Closely related to the Tufted Puffin, the Rhinoceros Auklet is a large alcid with a wedge-shaped head. It is drab-gray overall, darker above than below. In breeding plumage, the Rhinoceros Auklet has a bright orange-yellow bill adorned with a whitish horn. It also has two light feather tufts on each side of its head, going in a line back from the eye and the corner of the mouth. The juvenile appears similar to the non-breeding adult, lacking both the feather tufts and beak horn, although the lower mandible is yellow on the adult and dark on the juvenile.		1	Rhinoceros Auklets are found both in coastal habitats and far from land. They often feed close to shore, especially where tidal currents near islands create upwellings and concentrations of food. Flocks may over-night in protected bays and forage farther out to sea during the day. Nesting islands have grass, shrubs or trees, with enough soil for the birds to burrow. Nests are typically located on slopes from which the birds can take flight easily.	Washington's population of over 60,000 Rhinoceros Auklets nests at three main sites: Protection Island, Destruction Island, and Smith Island. Smaller numbers nest at a few other sites. The major colonies in Washington make up over 90% of the US population south of Alaska. Rhinoceros Auklets are common from February through September around islands of the outer coast of Washington and in inland marine waters. The rest of the year, they can be found in similar habitat, although less commonly. They forage closer to shore than their near-relatives, Tufted Puffins.	Behavior on land is difficult to observe because Rhinoceros Auklets are nocturnal at their nesting colonies. On water, the birds are excellent divers, swimming underwater using their wings like flippers. They can remain submerged for up to two minutes.	Small fish comprise most of the diet. Crustaceans and cephalopods are also taken.	Significant nesting colony on Smith Island (Smith et al. 1997) only breeding site in our four-county area. Adults visit nests under cover of darkness; breeding recorded only at probable level due to lack of nocturnal surveys by BBA observers. Washington's largest Rhinoceros Auklet colony, on Protection Island, lies 13 miles south across east end of Strait of Juan de Fuca. Bred historically on Whidbey Island (Richardson 1961). Populations fluctuate markedly for reasons not entirely understood.	Rhinoceros Auklets dig burrows in the ground on both forested and non-forested islands. Burrows can be up to 20 feet long and often fork many times. At the end of each burrow is a nest chamber with a shallow cup of moss and twigs. The female lays one egg, and both parents incubate for 5-1/2 to 7-1/2 weeks. Both parents feed the chick, which leaves the nest at the age of 7 or 8 weeks.	Rhinoceros Auklets are more migratory than most western alcids, but there is still considerable overlap between summer and winter ranges. Most birds leave northern breeding areas to winter in California, although they are present in low numbers in Washington in winter.	rhinoceros_auklet	RHAU			
123	14	Certhia	americana	Brown Creeper	Fairly common resident.	LC	As with many of Washington's birds, the Cascades divide this species into two subspecies. This species has declined in much of North America but appears to be doing well in Washington, with a small (not significant) increase on the state's Breeding Bird Survey since 1966.	The Brown Creeper is a small bird with a mottled brown back that blends in well with tree bark. It has a white breast and a white belly that fades to tan toward the vent. It has a pale eye-line and a bold, buff band across each wing that can be seen from above and below in flight. Its rump is reddish brown and its tail long and stiff. The Brown Creeper's bill is thin and curved.		1	In Washington, Brown Creepers prefer mature, moist, coniferous forests or mixed coniferous/deciduous forests. They are found in drier forests as well, including Engelman spruce and larch forests in eastern Washington. They generally avoid the rainforests of the outer coast. While they generally nest in hardwoods, conifers are preferred for foraging. In western Washington, look for them in Douglas firs.	In western Washington, Brown Creepers are fairly common year-round in forested areas at all but the highest elevations. They are common during the breeding season in forests to the edge of the Columbia Basin, in the northeast corner of the state, and in the Blue Mountains. During migration and winter they can be seen in other areas and habitats.	Brown Creepers spend most of their time on main trunks or major limbs, bracing themselves with their tails like miniature woodpeckers. These inconspicuous and quiet birds are easy to overlook as they spiral up the trunk of a tree, probing into bark crevices with their narrow, curved bills. After a Creeper gets to the top of a tree, it flies down to the bottom of the next tree to start over. Outside of the breeding season, Brown Creepers often flock with kinglets, nuthatches, and chickadees.	Brown Creepers eat insects, spiders and their eggs, and pupae that they find hidden in bark crevices. They eat some seeds and will come to suet feeders.	Fairly common in westside lowlands, ranging to higher-elevation forests in King County. In Kittitas County, fairly common at middle to high elevations. Prefers moist, fairly mature forest habitats, often with conifer component. Usually builds nest under loose flap of bark on hardwood trees. Few records from urbanized areas, and few from moderate-elevation forested blocks throughout.	Nests are occasionally built in cavities, but for the most part they are tucked into crevices in tree trunks where the bark has separated from the trunk. Males defend their nesting territories by singing, and may chase females around trees during courtship. Nests are found at varying heights and in various shapes, usually filling the available crevice. Nests are generally cups made of twigs, bark strips, moss, and leaves, with soft linings. The male helps provide material, but the female generally builds the nest and incubates 5 to 6 eggs for 14 to 17 days. The male and female both feed the nestlings, which leave the nest 13 to 16 days after hatching.	Brown Creepers are permanent residents in Washington, although high-altitude breeders may move down-slope during the winter. There may be some dispersal from eastern Washington in winter; Creepers are often more difficult to find there at that season.	brown_creeper	BRCR			
124	7	Chaetura	vauxi	Vaux's Swift	Fairly common summer resident.	LC	Although the extent of old-growth forest in the Northwest is diminishing and snags are frequently removed from mature forests in an effort to prevent forest fires, the population of Vaux's swift appears to have remained stable between 1966 and 2002.	The Vaux's Swift is a small swift with a short tail. This swift is usually seen only in flight and is often described as a cigar with wings. It is brownish-gray overall, with a lighter rump and breast. The Vaux's Swift's wings are long and narrow, and its flight is rapid.  The tail is squared off at the end, not notched like that of the Black Swift. The name is English, not French, and the 'x' is sounded.		1	Unlike their similar relatives, the Chimney Swifts, Vaux&#39;s Swifts do not often nest in chimneys. They usually nest in natural cavities with vertical entranceways, such as hollow trees. &nbsp;However, with the loss of major snags, Vaux&#39;s Swifts have been increasingly observed roosting during migration in large numbers in man-made structures such as large industrial chimneys. Foraging habitat is open sky over woodlands, lakes, and rivers, where flying insects are abundant. Nesting habitat is forest, either coniferous or mixed, but primarily old growth with snags for nesting and roosting.</p>	The Vaux's Swift is a common breeder in forested areas throughout Washington where suitable nesting trees exist.   In eastern Washington, they can also be found below the lower tree-line in residential areas. Throughout the summer, they are common in Seattle, although there are few recorded nests in Seattle. In the Blue Mountain region, they are found throughout the forests, down river valleys, and in the residential areas of Walla Walla (Walla Walla County) and Pomeroy (Garfield County). Vaux's Swifts arrive in Washington in late April and the beginning of May, and leave the eastern portion of the state by early September and the western portion of the state by early October.	Vaux's Swifts forage in fast flight, often low over the water. Their wide bills act as traps as they fly into swarms of insects.	Small flying insects, sometimes called aerial plankton, are the staple of the Vaux's Swift's diet.	Common breeder in most forested zones in King and Kittitas Counties. May be found nesting in wide variety of habitats from sea level to at least 5,000 feet elevation as long as suitable cavities available, including dead trees and chimneys. Spottily distributed in developed King County lowlands, mostly near rivers and freshwater lakes. Rare on Vashon Island and in Kitsap and Island Counties. Local in Kittitas Valley near Yakima River. Apparently absent from Wenatchee Mountains above ponderosa pine zone and below subalpine fir zone, <i>contra</i> predicted range in Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	In colonies, or in solitary pairs, the Vaux's Swift usually chooses a hollow tree for nesting. Both sexes collect nesting material, breaking off small twigs in flight and bringing them to the nest site, where they cement them in place with sticky saliva. The nest is a shallow half-cup attached to the inside of a tree. Clutches are large, usually six eggs, which both parents incubate for 18 to 19 days. Both parents feed and tend the young, and sometimes additional adults help incubate, brood, and feed the young. They raise only one brood each year. The young first fly when about a month old, and may continue to return to the nest site for a few days.	Washington's Vaux's Swifts move south in the fall, mostly to Mexico, with some birds wintering in California.	vauxs_swift	VASW			
125	15	Charadrius	alexandrinus	Snowy Plover	Uncommon coastal resident.	LC	Snowy Plovers have declined in numbers in many areas throughout their range, primarily due to human disturbance and habitat modification to outer beaches.  The spread of European beachgrass has reduced nesting habitat along the coast.  The subspecies found in Washington, the Western Snowy Plover, has been listed as threatened by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service since 1993.  Washington State lists it as endangered, and both Partners in Flight and the Washington Gap Analysis include it on their 'at-risk' list.  The recent protection of nesting areas may have stopped or even reversed its decline in Washington.	The Snowy Plover is a small, pale plover that blends in well with its sandy surroundings.  It has a thin, black bill, dark gray to blackish legs, dark patches on either side of the upper breast, and dark ear patches. The side and ear patches of juveniles and non-breeding adults (September to February) are pale.  The side and ear patches and crown are black in breeding males, and slightly duller in breeding females.		1	Snowy Plovers are found on barren or sparsely vegetated sand beaches along the coast, and on alkaline flats and river bars farther inland.  They winter primarily in coastal areas on beaches and tidal flats.	Three areas, Leadbetter Point (Pacific County), Midway Beach (Pacific County), and Damon Point (Grays Harbor County), currently support breeding populations of nesting Snowy Plovers.  Damon Point is this species' northernmost nesting area along the Pacific coast.  Wintering birds may be found at these same locations.  Snowy Plovers are rare vagrants to eastern Washington in April and May.	Snowy Plovers breed in loose colonies, and they are gregarious in winter.  During courtship, the male displays for the female by scraping a nest and bowing next to the female while flashing the white on his tail.  Breeding adults defend their nesting territory, but may forage away from defended areas with other Snowy Plovers.  Pairs typically separate following hatching, and the female finds a new mate to breed with for a second brood that season. Adult Snowy Plovers usually run when approached by humans or predators, but may fly if startled.  Adults sometimes feign injury to distract intruders away from nests or chicks.	Snowy Plovers typically forage by pausing, running, and pecking at the ground.  Their diet consists of small crustaceans, mollusks, marine worms, and insects.		Males construct a shallow scrape nest on open, bare ground, sometimes near a clump of grass or piece of driftwood.  The nest is lined with shell fragments and other bits of debris.  Females typically lay three eggs, and both parents incubate.  Males incubate at night and females during the day.  The young leave the nest and begin feeding themselves within hours of hatching.  The male raises the young, while the female usually leaves within six days and finds a new mate to breed with for a second brood that season. First flight is approximately 30 days after hatching.	Most inland breeders migrate to the coast in winter, but many coastal breeders are permanent residents.  The Washington population of Snowy Plovers consists of both resident and migratory birds.  Spring migrants arrive in early March, and leave from late June to late October.	snowy_plover				
126	15	Charadrius	melodus	Piping Plover		NT		One record, at Reardan Ponds (Lincoln County) in July 1990.		1								piping_plover				
127	15	Charadrius	montanus	Mountain Plover		NT		Two late-fall records from outer coast (Pacific County), one spring record from Turnbull NWR (Spokane County).		1								mountain_plover				
128	15	Charadrius	morinellus	Eurasian Dotterel		LC		Three fall records, all from Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County).		1								eurasian_dotterel				
129	15	Charadrius	semipalmatus	Semipalmated Plover	Fairly common migrant. Rare winter west. Uncommon migrant east.	LC	Numbers of Semipalmated Plovers declined in the late 19th Century due to unrestricted shooting, but have since recovered.  Semipalmated Plovers are not threatened or endangered in any part of their range.	The Semipalmated Plover is a small plover with a short bill and yellow-orange legs.  It has brown upperparts with white below and a single, dark breast band.  The breast band, sides of head, and forecrown are black in breeding adults, and brown in non-breeding adults and juveniles.		1	During migration and in winter, Semipalmated Plovers inhabit coastal mudflats and exposed sandy beaches.  They also migrate through the interior in small numbers, spending time on lakeshores, alkaline ponds, and shores of sloughs and flooded fields.  They breed throughout the North American Arctic and subarctic, often on gravel bars along rivers and ponds.  They tend to avoid marsh vegetation.	Semipalmated Plovers are abundant on the outer coast and its estuaries, and less so around Puget Sound, during peak migration at the end of April and the end of July.  Leadbetter Point has the largest counts of summer non-breeders.	Semipalmated Plovers walk or run with their heads up, pausing to look for prey.  They commonly 'foot-stir, holding one foot forward and vibrating the substrate to cause invertebrates to move and be detected.  They typically run if disturbed, but they are also fast, powerful fliers.  Semipalmated Plovers roost and fly in flocks, but forage singly.  They are territorial around nesting and feeding areas.	On the coast, the plovers' diet consists of marine worms, crustaceans, and small mollusks.  On breeding grounds and during migration inland, Semipalmated Plovers eat mostly insects.		The male Semipalmated Plover arrives on the breeding grounds before the female and establishes a nesting territory.  He performs a 'butterfly flight' during courtship.  The male constructs a scrape nest in sand or gravel and lines it with material found near the nest.  The female usually lays four eggs, and male and female spend nearly equal time incubating.  Chicks can walk and feed themselves within hours of hatching, but are brooded for several days.  Both sexes tend the young, but females may leave approximately 15 days after hatching.  Semipalmated Plovers have one brood per season.	Semipalmated Plovers migrate through Washington from mid-April to mid-May, and from July through September.  Small numbers regularly winter on the outer coast north to southern British Columbia.  Breeding is rare in Washington, but it has occurred at Damon Point.  Non-breeding birds occasionally summer on the coast.  Semipalmated Plovers are uncommon migrants in the interior part of the state.	semipalmated_plover	SEPL			
130	15	Charadrius	vociferus	Killdeer	Common resident. Rare winter east.	LC	Killdeers are widespread and common despite population declines in urbanized areas.  Human-modified habitats such as roads and golf courses may act as population sinks, locations where the habitat appears to be suitable but where adults fail to reproduce at replacement levels, because of the destruction of eggs and chicks and the negative impact of pesticides.	The Killdeer is the largest of the ringed plovers, and the only plover in its range with a double breast band.  Killdeers have brown upperparts, white underparts, and orange rumps.  Adults and juveniles look the same year round, but young, downy chicks have a single breast band.  In flight, the Killdeer's long, slender wings have conspicuous white wing stripes.		1	Killdeers frequent a variety of open habitats such as fields, meadows, gravel bars, and mudflats throughout the United States and most of Canada.  They require a sandy or gravelly substrate for nesting near a wet or muddy area where they can forage.  Killdeers are often found in human-modified habitats such as gravel roads, driveways, parking lots, and lawns.  They may be found in upland areas far from water.	Killdeers are found throughout eastern Washington from March through October.  West of the Cascades, they are common year round in farmlands and cities along the Puget Trough and west to Grays Harbor.	During the breeding season, Killdeers are easily observed vocalizing and performing broken-wing displays to distract intruders away from nests and chicks.  Pairs defend territories, and individuals spread out while foraging.  Killdeers have a 'running-stopping-bobbing' gait, and sometimes foot stir, vibrating the ground with a foot to stimulate movement from prey.  Killdeers often associate in small flocks during migration and in wintering areas.  Killdeers are extremely vocal and respond to disturbance with sharp alarm calls.  Males give a 'kill-dee' call during courtship flights and at other times as well.	Killdeers feed mainly on terrestrial invertebrates such as earthworms, grasshoppers, beetles, and snails.  They occasionally consume small vertebrates and seeds.	Abundant and widespread in many unforested habitats, including swales, farmland, grasslands, city park playing fields, residential lawns, construction sites, gravel parking lots, and gravel roofs. Basic requirements sandy/gravelly substrate and nearby wet or muddy area for foraging. Generally avoids montane wetlands, although one confirmed BBA record from head of Keechelus Lake at 2,500 feet elevation.	Pairs form on breeding grounds, and some nest together in successive seasons.  Both male and female participate in building the nest scrape.  Scrapes are located in soil or gravel in an open area.  Females typically lay four eggs. Both sexes incubate, with males incubating more often at night.  The young are precocial and are tended by both parents.  A pair may raise two broods per season.	Killdeers are present in Washington throughout the year, especially west of the Cascades.  Most individuals leave the intermountain interior during the winter.  Migrating birds return in February and March and stay until October or November.	killdeer	KILL			
131	6	Chen	caerulescens	Snow Goose	Common winter west. Uncommon to fairly common east.	LC	The population was reduced to 2,000 to 3,000 birds in 1900, but has made a strong recovery since then. Many populations have increased to the point that they are causing management concerns. The Snow Goose is now one of the most abundant species of waterfowl in the world, with a population between 6 and 7 million. This recovery can be attributed to their ability to take advantage of previously unexploited food sources on migration and wintering grounds. Because of their practice of tearing vegetation out of the ground, they are destroying their own habitat in some areas. Snow Geese are widely hunted (from October to January in Washington), but more control measures may need to be taken in the future as the population continues to grow beyond an environmentally sustainable number.	A large goose, the Snow Goose occurs in a white or a dark morph. The white morph, the most common, is all white with black primaries. The dark morph, known as the Blue Goose, is extremely rare in Washington and has a dark gray body and white head. Both morphs have orange legs. Juveniles are gray overall with dark legs. The Snow Goose is similar in appearance to the smaller and far less common Ross' Goose, but the Snow Goose has a 'grin-patch' (a dark patch on the side of the beak that makes it appear to be open or grinning) that the Ross' Goose lacks. There are two subspecies of Snow Goose, the Greater and the Lesser Snow Geese, which vary in size.		1	Snow Geese nest colonially in the Arctic tundra within five miles of the coast. Greater Snow Geese tend to nest in higher, drier areas than Lesser Snow Geese. During migration and in winter, they inhabit coastal and freshwater marshes, estuaries, and agricultural lands, with Greater Snow Geese more likely to be in saltwater habitats than Lessers.	Snow Geese are typically seen in large flocks; up to 55,000 winter in western Washington. Most gather in the Skagit River Delta (Skagit County) from mid-October to early May. They can also be seen in eastern Washington during migration (mid-April to mid-May and mid-October to mid-November).	Flocks are especially large in winter and during migration. Snow Geese forage mostly by walking in shallow water or on land, usually in flocks that may include other geese. They rip vegetation from the ground and can cause damage to areas where there are large numbers of geese.	Snow Geese feed almost exclusively on plant material. During the breeding season, they eat many seeds, leaves, and roots of aquatic vegetation.  The very young birds feed on invertebrates. Berries become more important in the fall. In winter, waste grain from agricultural fields has become a primary food source.		Long-term pair bonds are usually formed in the second year, although breeding doesn't usually start until the third year.  Females are strongly philopatric, meaning they will return to the place they hatched to breed. Snow Geese often nest in colonies. The female selects a nest site and builds the nest on an area of high ground. The nest is a shallow depression lined with plant material and may be reused from year to year. After the female lays the first of 3 to 5 eggs, she lines the nest with down. The female incubates for 22 to 25 days, and the young leave the nest within a few hours of hatching. Both parents tend the young, but they feed themselves. After 42 to 50 days they can fly, but they remain with their family until they are 2 to 3 years old.	Large flocks migrate long distances, flying very high along narrow corridors and stopping at traditional stopover and wintering areas. Washington's population nests on Wrangel Island in Russia, north and west of the Bering Strait.	snow_goose	SNGO			
132	6	Chen	canagica	Emperor Goose	Casual winter visitor. Washington Bird Records Committee review list species.	NT		A handsome, gray-bodied goose with white head and black throat, the Emperor Goose is intermediate in size between Snow Goose and Ross&#8217;s Goose, its close relatives. A short, thick neck, smallish head, and short bill contribute to its heavy-bodied appearance. The Emperor Goose breeds along the Bering Sea coastline in Alaska and Siberia and winters south to Kamchatka, the Aleutians, and the Gulf of Alaska, with small numbers regularly straying farther south along the Pacific Coast as far as California. In Washington it is a frequent, though not annual, winter visitor, most often on sheltered waters along the Pacific and North Olympic coasts but also near Puget Sound and on the Columbia River floodplain near Vancouver, often in the company of other geese.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								emperor_goose				
133	6	Chen	rossii	Ross's Goose	Rare migrant, winter resident.	LC	The population of Ross' Geese was estimated at only 2,000 to 3,000 individuals in 1931. Protection from hunting has helped the Ross' Goose population recover to a 1988 total of 188,000 breeding birds, although it is still listed as a species-of-concern on the Partners in Flight watch list. Still on the increase, populations are now thought to be expanding their range greatly--birds have been found farther east and west in recent years during migration. Most nesting occurs within a refuge, and hunting is still prohibited, but loss of migration stopover and wintering habitat continues to threaten the Ross' Goose.	The Ross' Goose is a small goose, similar in appearance to the Snow Goose. Like the Snow Goose, the Ross' Goose has a light and dark morph, although the dark-morph Ross' Goose is extremely rare. The light morph is white, and the dark morph is gray with a white head. Both morphs have black primaries. The bill is small and lacks the 'grin-patch' seen on the Snow Goose. Juveniles are mostly gray.		1	The Arctic nesting grounds of the Ross' Goose, not discovered until 1938, consist of tundra, marshes, and ponds. In winter and during migration, these geese can be found in shallow lakes, fresh-water marshes, flooded fields, and other agricultural lands.	The Ross' Goose is a rare species, but is becoming more common in Washington. You may occasionally find it mixed in with Snow Geese or other mixed-species flocks in the winter in the lowlands on both sides of the Cascades, in both fresh- and saltwater habitats. Flocks of up to 30 Ross' Geese have become fairly regular in the spring and fall in far-eastern Washington.	Ross' Geese are usually in flocks, often mixed with Snow Geese.  Their tendency to roost in tight flocks and be easily attracted to decoys may have made them vulnerable to market hunters, who had a significant impact on the population. These geese typically forage on the ground, wading or swimming in shallow water.	Almost exclusively plant-eaters, Ross' Geese eat grasses, sedges, and grain. In the fall, they eat more seeds and grains than grasses.		Ross' Geese breed in colonies, starting in their second or third year. The nest is on an island or the shore of a tundra lake, often situated at the edge of a low thicket. The nest, built by the female after she lays her first egg, is a bulky pile of leaves, grass, and moss, depressed in the middle and lined with down. The female lays a total of 4 eggs and incubates them for about 3 weeks. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching. The parents lead the young to water and food, and the goslings feed themselves. The male stands guard and actively defends the young against predators. The young fledge at 40 to 45 days.	The vast majority of the population nests in the Queen Maud Gulf Migratory Bird Sanctuary in the central Canadian Arctic. They migrate to California's Central Valley, often in mixed flocks with other geese.	rosss_goose				
134	32	Chlidonias	niger	Black Tern	Fairly common summer east. Rare west.	LC	Numbers have decreased since the 1960s due, in part to the destruction or degradation of much of their breeding and migration stopover habitat. Other potential impacts on the population are increased fertilizer runoff causing chemical contamination in wetlands, and overfishing in winter habitat. It is federally designated as a category 2 candidate for listing under the endangered species act, and is included on the Washington Gap Analysis list of birds at-risk.	A small, graceful, black and silver bird, the Black Tern has relatively broad wings and a short tail that is only slightly forked. In breeding plumage, it has a black body and head, silvery gray wings and a white vent. The legs and bill are also black. In non-breeding plumage, the Black Tern has a white belly and breast. The black on its head recedes, leaving dark sideburns, and is replaced with a white face. The legs are orange. Juveniles appear similar to adults in non-breeding plumage, but the gray mantle is mottled.		1	A marsh-breeding bird, the Black Tern nests in freshwater wetlands in Eastern Washington, mostly east of the Okanogan and Columbia Rivers. For nesting, it requires habitat with extensive, cover-providing, vegetation as well as open water. During migration, it uses large lakes and coastlines. In winter, it can be found along productive marine coastlines, lagoons and estuaries, especially off the Pacific Coast of Panama.	Common in parts of eastern Washington from May to mid-August, and rare in westerrn Washington from July to early September. Black Terns readily change colony sites, so there are not well established colonies that are a sure bet to find them at. They occur mostly east of the Okanogan and Columbia Rivers and in some years they also nest in Klickitat County and at Conboy Lake National Wildlife Refuge. They are most common in the northeast part of the state, and hundreds often nest at the Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge in Spokane County. During migration, Black Terns can be observed in wetlands throughout eastern Washington.	Black Terns swoop to pluck food from the water's surface; they rarely plunge-dive under the water. They will also forage in flight, snatching flying insects out of the air. Highly social, they often forage in flocks.	In the breeding season, insects are the primary food source, although small fish and other aquatic creatures are also eaten. During migration and in winter, small fish make up the bulk of the diet.		Breeding in scattered colonies, often associated with Forster's Terns, Black Terns nest low in marshes, on floating vegetation mats, muskrat houses, or on the ground near water. Both parents help build a nest which ranges from a substantial mound of vegetation to a simple depression with a little bit of vegetation added. When mixed with Forster's Terns, the Black Tern nests tend to be lower, closer to the water. In fact, the eggs of Black Terns are adapted to get wet (but not for extended periods of time), and are often moist. Both parents incubate the 2-4 eggs for about three weeks. After 2-3 days they may leave the nest, but stay close by. In approximately three weeks the young are ready to fly, but they may be fed by their parents for up to 2 more weeks. Typically only one brood is raised each year.	In the fall, Black Terns gather at feeding sites that are often north of breeding colonies, and then migrate south in groups. Spring migration is more direct, and migration, during both seasons, is usually over land. It appears that Black Terns nesting in the west may move south to the coast of Mexico, and then continue further south offshore.	black_tern				
135	42	Chondestes	grammacus	Lark Sparrow	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	A widespread but uncommon species, the Lark Sparrow has declined in some of its eastern range, due in part to urbanization and reduction of grassland habitat and to reversion of agricultural area to forests.  In the western United States, it is still fairly common and widespread.  Eastern Washington is at the western edge of its range.  Lark Sparrows are common hosts for Brown-headed Cowbirds.  Pesticides, especially those used to control grasshoppers, are also a potential threat.  The tendency of Lark Sparrows to occupy disturbed sites and edges between two habitat types has helped their numbers remain stable throughout the West.	The Lark Sparrow is a distinctive bird with a number of bold features that distinguish it from other sparrows.  The long tail has white triangles at the corners that are conspicuous in flight.  The rump is gray-brown and unmarked, and the back is a similar color with dark streaks.  The clear, white breast is punctuated with an eye-catching black dot.  The most distinguishing feature, however, is the alternating chestnut, white, and black head pattern.  The top of the head is chestnut, bisected by a white stripe.  Birds in their first winter have the same pattern, but the patches at each cheek and on the head are drab gray-brown rather than chestnut.		1	In the shrub-steppe zone, Lark Sparrows select grassland habitat with a scattered shrub layer.  They are often found at the edge between grasslands and shrub lands, in degraded shrub-steppe, or in open forests and grasslands.	During the breeding season, Lark Sparrows are fairly common but local in eastern Washington below the lower treeline in the central Columbia Basin, and in agricultural areas in northeastern Washington at the edge of the Ponderosa pine zone.  In Okanogan County, they can be found in the grassland and sagebrush in Brewster, and at Bridgeport State Park.  In Douglas County, they can be found breeding at Jameson Lake.  Sun Lakes State Park and Potholes Lakes are spots in Grant County where Lark Sparrows breed.  In eastern Yakima County, they are common around ranch pastures and open shrub-steppe in eastern Moxee Valley, north of Sunnyside, and along the easterly margin of the Yakima Training Center, north along the Columbia through Kittitas and Chelan Counties to Wenatchee.	By mid-July, adults and recently fledged young form small, loose flocks.  Lark Sparrows forage while walking out in the open.  When flushed, Lark Sparrows will fly long distances, much farther than most sparrows, indicating that they may not be highly territorial, they have large territories, or they are not packed very tightly on the breeding grounds.  During the breeding season, males sing from perches within their territories, from the ground, and even in flight.  They display on the ground to attract females, strutting back and forth with tails spread and wings drooped.  During copulation, the male will pass a twig to the female.	Lark Sparrows feed heavily on seeds in the winter.  During summer, they eat both arthropods and seeds, but appear to feed their young only arthropods.	Fairly common in grassy habitats of eastern Kittitas County at low to moderate elevations. Preferred habitat degraded shrub-steppe dominated by non-native grasses such as cheatgrass, often with exposed basalt ledge. Most records occurred in core, low-lying habitat along Columbia River, but species also utilizes higher, open agricultural habitats adjacent to degraded shrub-steppe. Records in these areas, some of which extend west of Yakima River, apparently represent occurrences in habitat peripheral to predicted core range as mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	The male Lark Sparrow displays on the ground in front of the female, and places twigs at potential nest sites.  When the female approves of a site, she builds the nest there, on the ground near the base of a tall weed or up in a shrub or in a rocky crevice.  Nests are often located in sandy or poor soils, or on elevated sites.  The nest is an open cup of grass, weeds, twigs, and bark, lined with fine grass, rootlets, and hair.  The female incubates the 4 to 5 eggs for 11 to 12 days.  Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 9 to 12 days after hatching and go to protective shrubby areas.  The pair may have up to two broods a season.	Lark Sparrows arrive in Washington in early May and start leaving in August. Wintering grounds are found throughout the southwestern US into Mexico, up the coast of California, and in small pockets of Oregon and Idaho.	lark_sparrow	LASP			
136	11	Chordeiles	minor	Common Nighthawk	Common summer east. Uncommon west.	LC	There are two subspecies of Common Nighthawk in Washington, separated by the Cascades.  The western Washington subspecies was probably not terribly common prior to European settlement of the area, but when western Washington forests were cleared, more open area was made available for Common Nighthawks. They became common in the late 1800s to the early 1900s. Now that many of these open areas have been developed, or have reverted to forest, the population of Common Nighthawks in western Washington has declined.  In eastern Washington, they are still fairly common, although they have also decreased there in the past 20 years. Common Nighthawks are declining in several other areas of North America as well. Pesticides may have reduced the amount of prey available. Also, competition with Glaucous-winged Gulls for rooftop nesting sites may have reduced the population. In addition, predation by gulls and perhaps by American Crows may be an important factor in the decline of rooftop nesting.  Common Nighthawks no longer nest on rooftops in Washington.	The Common Nighthawk is a cryptic bird most often seen in flight, when it can be easily identified by the white bar across each long, pointed wing.  This mottled gray and black bird has large eyes. It also has a tiny beak with a large gape, surrounded by stiff feathers called rictal bristles, which help the bird catch its aerial prey.		1	Common Nighthawks live in a variety of open habitats, from shrub-steppe, grassland, and agricultural fields to cities, clear-cuts, and burns, as long as there are abundant flying insects and open gravel surfaces for nesting.	Small numbers of Common Nighthawks still breed in western Washington, and can be found in the Puget Trough and out to Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) from June into early September.  They can be found from mid-May through August, but some birds remain into early September.  They are fairly common out in the open desert in the Columbia Basin and in the sagebrush and Ponderosa-pine zones.	This species is most active at dusk and dawn, when it forages in flight.  During the breeding season, males take time out from foraging to perform display flights, flying high up in the air and then diving, ending with a booming noise as they brake out of a fast dive. Vocalizations include a loud, distinctive call, given in flight.	Common Nighthawks eat flying insects.	Nests on bare ground in open landscapes, mostly at low and moderate elevations. In Kittitas County, common in shrub-steppe, grasslands, agricultural lands, and shrubby areas of lower forest zones surrounding Kittitas Valley, especially along rivers. Uncommon and local on both sides of Cascade crest at higher elevations where suitable forest openings available, including clearcuts and logged-off ridges. Once common and widespread in Puget Trough lowlands, now uncommon and highly local, principally in managed forests of southwestern Kitsap County.	Originally nesting on open ground along rivers or other gravelly stretches, the Common Nighthawk has adapted to city life in many areas and will nest on gravel rooftops.  The two eggs are laid directly on sand or gravel with no nest. The female does most of the incubation, which lasts for 18 to 20 days.  Once the young have hatched, both parents regurgitate insects for them.  The young begin to fly at 18 days and can feed independently at 25 days.  Within one month, they are on their own.  Each adult pair typically raises a single brood each season.	These long-distance migrants travel to South America for the winter, leaving their northern breeding grounds by September.  They often migrate in flocks, often hundreds or thousands of birds together.  They are one of the latest spring arrivals, reaching their northernmost breeding grounds in the Yukon in early June.	common_nighthawk				
137	16	Cinclus	mexicanus	American Dipper	Fairly common but local resident.	LC	Because much of the American Dipper population resides at higher elevations, information is lacking on range-wide population trends.  Some development, e.g., bridge building, has been good for American Dippers because it has increased potential nest sites.  Many other human incursions, such as deforestation and industrial and agricultural pollution, increase stream temperature and the amount of silt in the rivers, and both reduce the amount of prey in the streams.  Dams and irrigation systems, which alter water levels, can also affect dipper habitat.  Like salmon, which have many similar requirements, American Dippers are good indicators of stream health.  Restrictions and restoration projects put in place to help salmon will also benefit American Dippers.	American Dippers, formerly known as Water Ouzels, are solid gray birds with slightly browner heads.  Their beaks and eyes are dark, and their legs and feet light gray.  They have short tails that are often cocked up.  Dippers have white upper eyelids that are evident when they blink.  Males and females look alike, and their plumage does not change appreciably during the year.  Juveniles look like adults but may have white-tipped feathers.		1	American Dippers are typically found in turbulent mountain streams within forested zones.  They favor rocky substrates and clear, cold water, not unlike salmon.  They can be found down to sea level, and up to alpine zones, as long as there are suitable streams.  Dippers also occasionally inhabit pond or lake edges, or quiet sections of streams.  During winter, they may show up in unusual habitats, but will most always be found in or near water.	American Dippers are common year round throughout the mountainous areas of the state, and in many forested lowlands in western Washington out to the outer coast.  They are most common at mid-elevations, although in winter they may become concentrated at lower elevations.  They are rare, but may breed in the San Juan Islands.  In the Blue Mountains of southeastern Washington, American Dippers are restricted to larger rivers.  They are typically found up to or just over 5,000 feet in the Olympics, but have been found over 5,000 feet on Mount Rainier.	Dippers take their name from their characteristic bobbing.  Unlike a Spotted Sandpiper or other tail-bobber, dippers move their entire bodies up and down.  This bobbing, and the flashing of the white upper eyelid, may be visual communications that are important because of the loud environment that American Dippers tend to inhabit.  Dippers catch most of their food under water, and jump or dive into frigid water to forage.  They walk, heads submerged, along river bottoms, moving rocks to find prey underneath.  The dipper takes prey from the water's surface while swimming, and will even use its wings to 'fly' under water.  This bird will also fly through waterfalls.  These birds are generally solitary and defend both summer and winter territories.  Their calls and songs are loud, audible above the sound of rushing water.	Aquatic insects, especially larvae attached to river bottoms, make up the majority of the American Dipper's diet.  They also eat other small aquatic creatures, including fish eggs and very small fish, and will feed at salmon spawning areas.	Uncommon in mid- and high-elevation forests of King and Kittitas Counties, nesting and foraging on mountain rivers and streams. Outlying record from King County coastal lowlands in West Seattle in 1989 probably represents individual remaining on winter range. Absent from Island County (no suitable habitat). No BBA records from Kitsap County, but predicted breeding range mapped across much of county by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) receives some support from post-atlas record of singing bird along Chico Creek near Silverdale on 15 May 2004 (Nancy Ladenberger, pers. comm.).	Dippers are typically monogamous, but polygyny does occasionally occur.  Nest sites are generally the limiting factor for breeding American Dippers, so a male with a territory that includes two appropriate nest sites may mate with two females.  Dippers historically nested on ledges or banks along the sides of streams or behind waterfalls, and many still do.  Now, however, nests are often found under bridges as well.  Nests are large, mossy domes, up to a foot in diameter, and spray from the stream keeps the moss alive.  The female chooses the nest site, and both members of the pair help build the nest, often dipping nesting material in the water before adding it to the nest.  The nest has an outer shell of moss and grass, with a low entrance on a side facing the water.  Inside is a cup made of grass, leaves, and bark strips.  The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 13 to 17 days while the male provides food.  Once the young hatch, the female broods them for about a week, and then joins the male in providing food for them.  The young leave the nest at 24 to 26 days, and can swim and dive immediately after leaving the nest.  The parents will often split up the brood and continue to feed the young for up to 24 days after they leave the nest.	American Dippers are generally resident, unless the streams they inhabit freeze. If that happens, they will travel short distances into the lowlands to find a new stream for the winter or move down-slope.	american_dipper	AMDI			
138	1	Circus	cyaneus	Northern Harrier	Fairly common resident.	LC	During the middle of the 20th Century, Northern Harriers experienced declines due to pesticide use. The regulation of DDT has helped the harrier population recover, although habitat loss is still a significant threat. Many wetlands and open spaces are in danger of development or conversion to less beneficial habitat. Overgrazing also affects their habitat. Numbers have severely declined in the East due to increasing numbers of ground predators and lack of habitat. Northern Harriers are, however, fairly adaptable and generalized, and seem to be fairly stable in North America in spite of these threats. Numbers are, however, on the decline globally.	Formerly known as the Marsh Hawk, the Northern Harrier is a slender, medium-sized raptor with a long, barred tail and distinctive white rump. It has an owl-like facial disk that is visible at close range. Harriers are unusual in that there is a greater difference between male and female plumage than is typical of raptors. Females are brown above with varying degrees of brown and buff streaking below. Males are gray above with an unmarked lighter color below; they also have black wingtips. Juveniles are brown above and plain orange-brown below. In Eurasia, this bird is known as the 'Hen Harrier.'		1	Northern Harriers are open-country birds, often seen soaring low over grassland. They also occur in farmlands, parks, and steppe habitat.	Washington has both breeding and wintering populations of Northern Harriers. Additionally, migrants occur throughout the state. In winter, they can be found in open lowlands throughout much of the state. As breeders, they are most common in eastern Washington, but also breed in the Puget Trough and on the southern outer coast.	During winter, Northern Harriers sometimes roost on the ground in groups. Harriers use their sense of hearing more than other hawks, flying low over open fields and listening for prey. In flight, they hold their wings up in a slight 'V' position.	Diet varies based on prey availability, but Northern Harriers take mostly small mammals and sometimes birds. In spring and winter, especially in the northern part of their range, they prey predominantly on voles.	Fairly common in Kittitas County below ponderosa pine zone in open habitats including farms, rangeland, and shrub-steppe. Fairly common on Whidbey Island, e.g., near military facilities and at Crockett Lake. Uncommon in King County in open wetlands and farmlands, mostly at low elevation, but absent from most of urban core and declining throughout, possibly due to ground-nesting requirement. Only two records from higher elevations with one confirmation near Hull Lake where fledglings recorded 25 June 1998. Only Kitsap County record involved fledged juvenile in late July that may have dispersed from elsewhere.	The male Northern Harrier attracts a female with a roller-coaster display flight, often performing 25 rises and falls. In Washington, these displays can be seen as early as late February. Loose colonies may form, and males may mate with up to five females in a season, although monogamy is more common. The number of females a male can support is related to the abundance of prey in the spring, which can vary greatly. The male usually starts the nest, and the female then takes over construction. They build the nest on the ground in dense clumps of vegetation. The female incubates the 4 to 6 eggs for 30 to 32 days, and broods them for two weeks after they hatch. The male provides most of the food for the female and nestlings during this period. After two weeks, the nestlings begin to walk around, and at 4 to 5 weeks, they begin to make short flights from the nest area. By 45 days, they make sustained flights. Once they can fly, the parents feed them in mid-air, passing food to the first fledgling to reach them.	As with most species that prey heavily on voles, Northern Harriers are somewhat nomadic, and densities change with the abundance of prey. Throughout much of their range, they are long-distance migrants, wintering as far south as Panama, but they are resident in other areas, including Washington.	northern_harrier	NOHA			
139	66	Cistothorus	palustris	Marsh Wren	Common resident. Uncommon winter east.	LC	The populations on either side of the Cascades are considered separate subspecies and have a number of differences.  Breeding Bird Survey records have shown a significant population increase throughout Washington from 1966 to 1991.  Christmas Bird Count numbers have also been increasing recently, which may be the result of more complete coverage in Marsh Wren habitat rather than an actual increase of wintering birds.  While Marsh Wrens readily colonize created wetlands and nest in invasive plants such as purple loosestrife, wetland loss and degradation are a concern for this species.	The Marsh Wren is usually not seen for long, as it pops up from dense emergent vegetation, only to duck back out of sight moments later.  Small and stocky, with the classic wren tail held upright, the Marsh Wren is easily identified as a wren.  The upperparts are brown with a black patch streaked with white, and the tail is barred with black.  In Washington populations, the shoulders are brown, unmottled, and much duller colored than those of Marsh Wrens in eastern North America.  The belly is gray-brown, lighter than above.  The throat is light, and the white eye-line and brown crown are field marks to note.		1	Emergent vegetation is the most significant component of nesting habitat for Marsh Wrens.  They inhabit freshwater and saltwater marshes, roadside ditches, and small agricultural runoff sites, and will even nest in invasive plants such as purple loosestrife and reed-canary grass.  In winter, they frequent a wider variety of habitats, including wet meadows and coastal dune grass.  In eastern Washington, early nests are typically built in cattails, but after mid-June, over 90% of the nests built are in bulrush.  (Bulrush grows in deeper water than cattails, and is more likely to be under water after the marsh has dried up around the shallower cattails.)  In western Washington, Marsh Wrens inhabit wetlands with both cattail and bulrush, and have also been known to nest in emergent hardhack.	Marsh Wrens are abundant where there is appropriate habitat.  During the breeding season, they are found throughout western Washington and in Grant and Adams Counties, the Yakima Valley, Grand Coulee, and along the Columbia River.  In winter, they are still common in western Washington, even in small marshes.  Most eastern Washington Marsh Wrens leave by mid-October and return in March, but some stay through the winter at lower elevation.	Marsh Wrens glean food from the stems of dense marsh vegetation, from the ground, or on the water's surface.  They usually forage out of view, hopping up for brief moments when they can be seen by patient observers.  Like other wrens, male and female Marsh Wrens of all ages will destroy the eggs of their own and other species.  Washington's Marsh Wrens build between 14 and 22 incomplete 'dummy' nests, which may help with predator avoidance.  The dummy nests are also used throughout the year for shelter, and dummy nests of resident birds tend to be sturdier than dummy nests of migrants who do not use them for winter shelter.  In fact, western Washington Marsh Wrens, which use their dummy nests for shelter in the winter, spend significantly more time building them than their eastern Washington counterparts who migrate and don't need the winter roosts.   Male Marsh Wrens have up to 200 songs, which they sing almost continuously during the breeding season.  Their songs resemble the sound of a sewing machine.	Like most wrens, Marsh Wrens eat primarily insects and spiders.  They eat aquatic insects as well.	Fairly common to locally common in western counties at lower-elevation wetlands with emergent vegetation. Utilizes both fresh- and saltwater marshes, including small wetlands created by agricultural runoff and road construction. Absent from Bainbridge Island and nearly absent from western Kitsap County. No records from Vashon Island despite predicted breeding range mapped there by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Rare in Kittitas County, with just two possible records near Yakima River south of Ellensburg.	Marsh Wrens are polygamous, with about half of the males in Washington having two or more females on their territory at one time.  The male builds many unfinished nests and then shows them to the female, who selects one and adds a lining to it.  This process starts in March in western Washington and in early April in eastern Washington.  The nest is anchored to standing vegetation, 1-3 feet off the ground, and is an oval mass of grasses, cattails, and sedges woven together with an entrance at the side.  The lining is made of fine grass, plant down, and feathers.  The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 13 to 16 days, and broods the young for about a week after they hatch.  In western Washington, males help feed the young, but in eastern Washington, males don't help feed the early-season clutches.  Later in the season, when there is less chance of attracting new mates, they will help feed.  The young leave the nest after about 13 to 15 days.  In western Washington, the parents continue to feed the young for another week or two.  Once the young have fully fledged, the female will raise a second brood.	Migration is variable throughout the range.  Wintering grounds for migrating birds can be found throughout the southwestern United States, in pockets of the southeast United States, and in Mexico.  Eastern Washington populations are migratory, while west-side birds are resident.	marsh_wren	MAWR			
140	6	Clangula	hyemalis	Long-tailed Duck	Fairly common winter coast. Rare east.	VU	In the high Arctic, Long-tailed Ducks are often the most abundant bird, with a population in the millions. Such dense concentrations are vulnerable to oil spills and other contamination of the northern seas. When diving, many are caught in fishing nets and drown.	Formerly known in the United States as the Oldsquaw, the Long-tailed Duck is a distinctive sea duck with a short bill and heavy body. The short, pointed, all-dark wings of the Long-tailed Duck are evident in all sexes and plumages. In breeding plumage, the male has a long, black tail-plume, a white rump and belly, and black breast. The head and back are black, with brown shoulders and a white patch around the eye. In winter the brown on the back is replaced by white, and the head is white with a gray cheek-patch. In spring, the female is gray with a white rump, and white around the eye and at the nape of the neck. In winter, she has a white face with dark crown and cheek-patch. The juvenile is similar to the female--gray with white, although it has more white on its face than the female.		1	Long-tailed Ducks breed in shallow tundra ponds and lakes.  During other seasons, Long-tailed Ducks can be found on the ocean over sandy substrates. They prefer sheltered water, but can be found on the open ocean as well.	In Washington from mid-October to early May, Long-tailed Ducks are usually found in deep salt water, sometimes intermingled with scoters. They are common on the coast and in north Puget Sound, and are less common in the southern end of the sound. Large flocks can often be observed off Point Roberts and in Bellingham Bay. They have also been seen on ponds and lakes in eastern Washington and in the Okanogan Valley.	Long-tailed Ducks dive and swim under water, and, while they propel themselves with their feet like other ducks, their wings are sometimes partly opened under water.  Most feeding is done within 30 feet of the surface, but they are capable of diving more than 200 feet below the surface. Long-tailed Ducks fly low with stiff and shallow wing-beats, often tilting from side to side.	For Long-tailed Ducks at sea, mollusks and crustaceans are the main source of food. In summer, aquatic insects, other aquatic invertebrates, and some plant material are eaten.		Most female Long-tailed Ducks first breed at the age of two. Pair bonds are established in the winter, or during the spring migration, and last until incubation begins. The nest is located on dry ground close to the water, often hidden in the undergrowth or among rocks. It is a depression lined with plant material and great quantities of down that the female adds to the nest after she begins laying. She usually lays from 6 to 11 eggs and incubates them for 24 to 29 days. Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest and can swim and dive well. The female tends them and may dislodge food items for them when she is diving, but they feed themselves. They first fly at 35 to 40 days.	Migration takes place late in the fall and early in the spring. Long-tailed Ducks may travel in large flocks and fly very high when going over land, although they usually migrate along coastlines. Migration may be a short distance from the inland breeding area straight out to the coast, or may be a long trip down the coastline. On the West Coast, however, the majority of the population winters in the Bering Sea.	long-tailed_duck	LTDU			
141	24	Coccothraustes	vespertinus	Evening Grosbeak	Common but irregular resident.	LC	Evening Grosbeaks were formerly restricted to the western United States but have expanded their range eastward across the country. This expansion is credited to the planting of box elders and other seed- and fruit-bearing trees across the northern prairies, as well as the presence of bird feeders. As is the case with many irruptive, nomadic species, it is difficult to determine the true population of Evening Grosbeaks. For example, considerable variation in the numbers wintering in the Washington lowlands may reflect either changes in population or merely varying migration.	Evening Grosbeaks are medium-large songbirds with very thick, seed-cracking bills. They are highly sexually dimorphic. The males have blackish heads, bright yellow undersides and backs, black wings with large, white wing-patches, and black tails. They also have yellow brows. Their bills become greenish in spring and summer. Females are brownish-gray with dark heads. They have black wings with white patches, but less white on their wings than the males. They also have yellow underwings. Juveniles look similar to females.		1	Evening Grosbeaks breed in mixed conifer forests, but will used broadleaved trees for nesting and foraging. During migration and winter they are often found in open, broadleaved forests, especially ones with fruiting shrubs.	Evening Grosbeaks are common breeders in mountainous areas throughout Washington, although they are less common in the Olympics than elsewhere. They are seen sporadically in winter throughout much of the forested portion of the state, and are especially common in the Puget lowlands in April and May.	Outside of the breeding season, Evening Grosbeaks are usually in noisy flocks. They typically forage in trees and shrubs, at the tops and outer branches. They also forage on the ground and often gather at roadsides or in campground fire-pits, where they forage on minerals. Large numbers gather in areas with outbreaks of spruce budworms.	Large seeds, especially ash, maple, and sunflower seeds from bird feeders, make up most of the Evening Grosbeak's diet. They also eat invertebrates, especially spruce budworm.	Fairly common and widespread, though erratic, throughout four-county area in conifer-dominated forests. Low level of breeding confirmation probably indicative of sparse breeding. Wandering habits may diffuse and overrepresent true breeding pattern, as some BBA records at possible and probable levels may reflect non-breeding birds. Area-to-area abundance can vary considerably with food availability, resulting in high numbers one year, none the next.	Evening Grosbeaks are generally monogamous, although when there is an unusually plentiful food supply, polygamy can occur.  In most cases, pairs form before the birds arrive on the breeding grounds. Nests are typically located high up in trees, on horizontal branches well out from the trunk or in vertical forks. The female builds the nest, which is a loose saucer of roots and twigs lined with fine grass, moss, rootlets, needles, and lichen. After laying 3-4 eggs, she incubates them for 12 to 14 days. The male brings food to the female on the nest. Both members of the pair feed the young. Young Evening Grosbeaks leave the nest after 13 to 14 days, but remain near the nest for 2 to 5 days, and the adults continue to feed them for some time after that. Some pairs raise two clutches in a single season.	Evening Grosbeaks are somewhat nomadic and wander widely in winter. Irruptions in fall and winter are common in response to changing food supplies. Eastern birds may migrate south, but western populations are more often altitudinal migrants, moving from the mountains into nearby lowlands in winter.	evening_grosbeak	EVGR			
142	19	Coccyzus	americanus	Yellow-billed Cuckoo	Accidental summer.	LC	Populations of Yellow-billed Cuckoos have severely declined throughout their range, especially in western states, where they are now extirpated from British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon.  As of 1999, the California population was down to 30 pairs.  The Idaho population is estimated at a few dozen pairs.  Most of this decline can be attributed to habitat loss, but unknown factors also seem to have played a major role.  Despite this dramatic decline, the Yellow-billed Cuckoo is considered only a candidate for listing by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, and a species of concern by the US Fish and Wildlife Department.  There has been controversy surrounding the federal listing of the Yellow-billed Cuckoo, because the status of the western population as a subspecies is in question, and this precludes listing.	Yellow-billed Cuckoos are considered extirpated in Washington, but they appear extremely rarely during summer.  Yellow-billed Cuckoos are slender, long-tailed birds with white underparts and dark upperparts.  They have unstreaked, grayish-brown backs and rufous wings.  Their tails have black-and-white bars when seen from below, but from above they show brown with white spots at the edges.  Their bills are mostly yellow and curved downward.		1	The habitat of the Yellow-billed Cuckoo in western North America is forested stream-sides.  Cottonwoods and willows that form open woodlands with dense, low vegetation are particularly preferred.  These cuckoos are generally absent from large, urban areas and dense forests, although they will use both of these habitats in central North America.	Yellow-billed Cuckoos are officially considered extirpated in Washington, and the occasional sightings are vagrants.  Historically, they nested along wooded rivers in eastern Washington, along the shores of Lake Washington (King County), in Tacoma (Pierce County), and in Whatcom County.  A recent observation in Washington was a single bird near Elma at Vance Creek County Park (Grays Harbor County) in 1996. In 1997, the Peregrines that nest in downtown Seattle were captured on video, feeding a Yellow-billed Cuckoo to their nestlings.  In the latter half of the 20th Century, there were three sightings along forested stream-sides in eastern Washington.  Other sightings in the past few decades were along historical breeding grounds on the shore of Lake Washington and in a cottonwood grove along the Snohomish River near Sultan (Snohomish County).	Yellow-billed Cuckoos earned the name Rain Crow because they appear to call more often on cloudy days, although this behavior has never been substantiated.  They generally forage by gleaning, watching inconspicuously from a perch and waiting for potential prey to move and disclose its location.	Large insects, especially caterpillars, make up the majority of the Yellow-billed Cuckoo's diet.  These cuckoos may gather in areas with caterpillar outbreaks, although they are less reliant on caterpillars than are Black-billed Cuckoos.  They eat small lizards, frogs, eggs, and occasionally young birds.		Yellow-billed Cuckoos have a very condensed breeding cycle, and the timing of their breeding onset is correlated with abundant local food.  They nest in trees, shrubs, or vines on horizontal branches.  Both members of the pair help build the nest, incubate the eggs, brood, and feed the young.  The nest is a loose platform of twigs and stems, lightly lined with grass, leaves, and bark strips, sometimes with dry pine needles scattered on the rim.  There are usually 2-3 eggs, and incubation lasts 9-11 days.  The young leave the nest after 7-9 days, and can fly at three weeks.  Yellow-billed Cuckoos will lay eggs in the nests of other birds of their own and other species.  The other species that they most commonly parasitize are American Robin, Gray Catbird, and Wood Thrush.	Yellow-billed Cuckoos are Neotropical migrants.  Most populations winter in South America.  They generally migrate late in the fall and spring, and western populations generally migrate later than populations in eastern North America.	yellow-billed_cuckoo				
143	19	Coccyzus	erythropthalmus	Black-billed Cuckoo		LC		Closely related to the Yellow-billed Cuckoo but slighter in build, the Black-billed Cuckoo has a smaller, dark bill, a relatively shorter tail with less obvious white spots, and little or no reddish coloration in the wings. Both species frequent groves of hardwood trees where they tend to remain motionless in dense foliage, and are more often detected by their rather similar, loud vocalizations than by sight.

The Black-billed Cuckoo breeds east of the Continental Divide, from central Alberta and eastern Montana across southern Canada and the Midwest to the Maritime Provinces, south to Virginia, western North Carolina, Missouri, and Kansas. A long-distance migrant, it winters in South America. There are very few records west of the Rockies. Normally a magnet for &#8220;eastern&#8221; vagrants, California has seen Black-billed Cuckoos only 16 times, and Oregon has no records. Washington&#8217;s four records all occurred in a narrow window between 19 June and 1 July. Three were near the eastern edge of the state (Whitman and Pend Oreille counties) and the fourth was in Bremerton (Whatcom County). The most recent was in 1988. British Columbia has about 20 records from the interior of the province between late May and mid-August. Idaho has about a dozen records, and there is some evidence that breeding may have occurred a few times in the southern part of the state.

<I>Revised August 2007</I>		1								black-billed_cuckoo				
144	47	Colaptes	auratus	Northern Flicker	Common resident.	LC	Northern Flickers play an important role in forested ecosystems by excavating nesting and roosting holes that are subsequently used by other birds, animals, and reptiles that cannot make their own.  They are abundant and widespread throughout their range and are the most common woodpecker in Washington.  The spread of residential development, roads, and the increasing fragmentation of the forest have increased the amount of habitat for Northern Flickers. However slight declines have been observed recently, which may be due to competition with European Starlings for nest holes .	Northern Flickers are unusual among North American woodpeckers in that their general coloration is brown rather than black and white. Their backs are brown with black barring, and their chests and bellies are light tan with prominent clear black spots.  Their tails are black, and they have white rumps. There is a broad, black band across the upper chest. Two forms occur in Washington: the Red-shafted, and less commonly, the Yellow-shafted.  The flight feathers of Red-shafted Flickers have reddish-orange shafts, and their wings and tail are reddish-orange below.  Red-shafted Flickers have gray heads, throats, and napes, and their foreheads are brown. Male Red-shafted Flickers have red moustaches; the moustaches of females are pale brown. Typically, neither sex has a colored nape crescent (but see below). The flight feathers of Yellow-shafted Flickers have yellow shafts, and their wings and tail are yellow below.  The heads of Yellow-shafted Flickers are gray above, and their faces and throats are brown. Males have black moustaches; females have none. Both males and females have red nape crescents. Intergrades between the two forms are common, and some Red-shafted birds in Washington have red nape crescents.		1	Northern Flickers can be found throughout most wooded regions of North America, and they are familiar birds in most suburban environments.  They need some open area and do not nest in the middle of dense forests, but they breed in most other forest types.  Outside of the breeding season, they also frequent other open areas, including suburban lawns and parks, grassland, sagebrush, and even sand dunes.	Common and widespread throughout Washington, Northern Flickers breed across most of the state, especially in residential areas, city parks, and gardens.  Starting in September, they tend to concentrate in the lowlands on both sides of the Cascades, especially in areas with abundant berries.  Winter is when the Yellow-shafted form is most likely to be seen, particularly on the outer coast.	Unlike most other woodpeckers, Northern Flickers are principally ground feeders, though they also forage on tree trunks and limbs.  They have a strongly undulating flight pattern, and they can be easily identified in flight by this pattern and their prominent white rumps.  Their whinny call sounds somewhat like laughter. They also give a distinctive call that is often transcribed as klee-yer.	Northern Flickers feed principally on ants but also take other insects and some fruit, seeds, and berries.	Common and ubiquitous throughout, ranging from coastlines to subalpine forests. Utilizes residential neighborhoods, city parks, and gardens. Forages in shrub-steppe if nesting trees nearby. Easily most common woodpecker in four-county area, and one of most widespread species overall. Washington breeders represent red-shafted race <i>C.a. cafer</i> (Smith et al. 1997), but a few breeding birds occasionally show intergrade yellow-shafted characteristics.	Northern Flickers typically excavate nesting cavities in dead or diseased pine, cottonwood, or willow trees.  Males do most of the excavation with some help from females.  Both incubate the 5 to 8 eggs for about 11 days, then brood the newly hatched young for about 4 days more.  Both sexes feed the young, which leave the nest after 24 to 27 days.  The parents continue to feed the young once they fledge, and soon the young begin to follow the adults to foraging sites and gather their own food.	Northern Flickers are partially migratory.  Red-shafted Flickers tend to over-winter on their breeding grounds or migrate shorter distances than Yellow-shafted Flickers, but both tend to withdraw from higher elevations and winter in the western Washington lowlands.  Yellow-shafted Flickers, which are strongly migratory, become more common in Washington, especially along the outer coast, in winter.  This increase is probably due largely to Yellow-shafted Flickers that have migrated to Washington from Alaska and the northern Rocky Mountains.	northern_flicker	NOFL			
145	38	Colinus	virginianus	Northern Bobwhite	Rare resident west	NT	Three subspecies have been introduced in Washington, with the first introduction probably on Whidbey Island in 1871.  They formerly occurred in southeastern Washington, where they were introduced into Walla Walla County in 1920.  This population has declined dramatically in recent years, and the last sighting was recorded in 1988.  Introductions were made into the Wenas Creek area, but attempts to establish a population there have failed.  Bobwhites are continually introduced into agricultural and low-density development areas throughout the state for hunting.	A round-bodied, ground-dwelling bird, the Northern Bobwhite was introduced into Washington from the eastern United States.  Highly streaked and cryptic, the Northern Bobwhite is patterned in shades of brown varying from rufous, to chocolate, to tan.  A light-colored throat and eyebrow band are distinctive marks. This is the only quail in Washington that is uniformly streaked in brown.  Males and females appear similar, but males have less streaking on their breasts, and their eyebrows and throat bands are white instead of tan.		1	An early-successional species, the Northern Bobwhite lives in shrubby thickets adjacent to open areas such as grasslands, agriculture, roadsides, and wood edges.  Bobwhites take advantage of edges created by fire, timber harvesting, and agriculture.	A few Northern Bobwhites can be found in the Puget Trough in grassy habitats, especially in the prairies of southern Puget Sound, where they are established locally.  Elsewhere, frequent introductions make their distribution difficult to predict.  It is possible to see them anywhere in the state in appropriate habitat, although almost never in the same place from one year to the next.	In non-breeding seasons, Northern Bobwhites congregate in coveys of up to 20 birds.  During the breeding season, they flock in smaller family groups.  As they often stay amid dense cover, they are more often heard than seen.  Like most quail, Northern Bobwhites travel primarily on foot, although they will fly short distances when disturbed, often with an explosive takeoff.  At night, members of the covey roost on the ground in a circle, tails inward with their heads pointing out.	The Northern Bobwhite's diet of plant matter and insects varies with the season.  In winter, they eat mostly seeds, while in summer when raising young, they eat mostly insects.  The young also eat mostly insect matter.	Introduced from eastern United States. Typically found in open shrublands and grassy habitats. Individual birds escaped from captivity or released by hunters may be encountered nearly anywhere. Only Washington populations generally considered securely established inhabit prairie landscapes of Pierce and Thurston Counties. Reports in recent years of calling birds in Soos Creek&#8211;Lake Wilderness area, including three BBA records in 1990 and 1996, may indicate small, self-sustaining population in southwestern King County.	The male and the female choose a nest site on the ground in dense brush, and both help build a shallow depression lined with grass and leaves.  They often weave other materials into an arch over the nest, resulting in a well-hidden entrance.  Both sexes incubate a clutch of 12-16 eggs.  Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest.  They are tended by both parents, but feed themselves.	Permanent resident	northern_bobwhite				
146	17	Columba	livia	Rock Pigeon	Common resident.	LC	Originally from Europe, Northern Africa, and India, the Rock Pigeon was domesticated and raised for food and trained for homing.  Early European settlers at Jamestown and Plymouth introduced it to North America in the 1600s.  All of the birds in North America and most of the European populations are descended from domestic stock.  Numbers have increased significantly as more and more of our country is urbanized.  While Rock Pigeons can be a nuisance, they do not negatively affect native species, since they are predominantly found in disturbed environments. In fact, since Peregrine Falcons living in urban areas prey predominantly on them, the abundance of Rock Pigeons has assisted the comeback of the falcon .	Rock Pigeons, more commonly known simply as just pigeons, are familiar birds in any developed area. Chunky birds with sharply pointed wings, Rock Pigeons are found in a variety of colors and patterns, although all gray is most common. Rock Pigeons have black bills with white fleshy bases, red eyes, red fleshy eye-rings, and salmon-colored feet.		1	Rock Pigeons are found in a wide variety of habitats, especially suburban, urban, and agricultural environments. Their original native habitat is cliff-sides, and Rock Pigeons can be found in eastern Washington nesting on cliffs.	Rock Pigeons are widespread and common year round at lower elevations throughout Washington, especially in cities and farms.  In eastern Washington they are also found on basalt cliffs along the Columbia River in the Columbia National Wildlife Refuge (Grant County).  They are absent from heavily forested areas.	Rock Pigeons are fast fliers and are usually seen in flocks. They forage mostly on the ground, but occasionally forage in trees as well. Unlike their agile, native cousin, the Band-tailed Pigeon, Rock Pigeons move about only clumsily in trees.  Large groups often congregate along utility wires, window ledges, and rooftops.	Seeds and grain make up most of the Rock Pigeons' diet on farms, but in cities, popcorn, bread, and other human food is usually part of their diet.	Introduced from Old World. Widespread and common in non-forested landscapes at lower elevations throughout Puget Trough, nesting mostly about cities, towns, and farms. In Kittitas County, common in similar habitats in Kittitas Valley, in Teanaway River Valley, and along I-90 corridor from Easton to Vantage; also nests on basalt cliffs of Columbia and Yakima Rivers. Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) shows range extending across Quilomene/Colockum Wildlife Areas, Yakima Training Center, and forested parts of Kitsap County, but these predictions not supported by BBA records.	In urban and suburban areas, Rock Pigeons nest on a variety of covered, flat surfaces, including ledges and beams in bridges and buildings.  In natural areas, they nest on sheltered cliff-ledges.  Pairs may form long-term bonds.  The male supplies nesting material, and the female builds the nest, a platform of twigs and grass.  Nest sites are used repeatedly and nesting material is added for each new brood. A pair may raise 5 or more broods a year. Both parents incubate the 2 eggs for 16-19 days, and both feed the young 'pigeon milk, a protein and fat-rich liquid produced in their crops.  At about 4 weeks of age, the young leave the nest.	Rock Pigeons do not migrate.  However if displaced from a nesting area, they have a good homing ability and can return from long distances.  It is thought that this ability evolved to help them find their own nests on cliffs covered with large colonies of similar looking nests.	rock_pigeon	ROPI			
147	68	Contopus	cooperi	Olive-sided Flycatcher	Fairly common summer resident.	NT	The Breeding Bird Survey and other studies have detected significant declines throughout the range of this species in recent decades. This decline is especially evident in the areas of greatest abundance, including the Cascade Mountains. Olive-sided Flycatchers are listed by the US Fish and Wildlife Service as a species-of-concern, and are included on the Audubon~Washington watch list. The cause of the decline is unknown, but scientists speculate that it may be due to habitat loss on the wintering grounds, or a decrease in suitability of habitat on the breeding grounds. Logged areas and other clearings appear similar to post-fire clearings, and Olive-sided Flycatchers certainly use those areas. Unfortunately, studies on rates of productivity have shown that they fledge fewer young from these areas, which may account for some of the decline as well. The most significant decrease has occurred in eastern North America	The Olive-sided Flycatcher has dark sides bordering a white hourglass on its breast; markings that make the bird look as if it is wearing a vest. It is a bulky flycatcher, with a relatively short tail and large head.		1	This forest flycatcher historically used recently burned areas, but now that most fires are suppressed, it often takes advantage of areas that have been logged, as well as other clearings and edges, which are superficially similar to post-fire stands.	Olive-sided Flycatchers are common in most forest openings throughout the state from mid-May to mid-August. They are less common in the far southeastern corner of the state and sometimes can also be found in city parks or suburban areas, especially during migration.	The Olive-sided Flycatcher sits high in a treetop, darting out after a flying insect, then returns to its perch. It vocalizes frequently, and is readily identified by its distinctive quick-THREE-beers or pip-pip-pip call.	Large flying insects, especially bees, are the preferred diet of the Olive-sided Flycatcher.	Common in most forested landscapes throughout our four-county area, from sea level to subalpine parklands. Prefers sites with large tree patches adjacent to clearings, burns, clearcuts, or wetlands. Breeds sparingly in city parks and residential neighborhoods, but most sightings in such places probably migrants.	The male defends his nesting territory and attracts a mate by singing from a prominent perch. Both members of the monogamous pair aggressively defend the nest, which is an open cup of twigs, weeds, and grass, with a fine lining. The nest is usually at varying heights in a conifer, on a horizontal branch well away from the trunk, hidden amidst dense twigs or needles. The female builds the nest and incubates the 3 to 4 eggs for 14 to 16 days. Both parents feed the young, which fledge at 19 to 21 days. The young continue to depend on the adults for about a week after leaving the nest, and family groups may stay together until fall migration.	Olive-sided Flycatchers undertake one of the longest and most drawn out migrations of Washington's birds. High-elevation nesters usually move downslope after the breeding season. All of Washington's breeders generally leave in August for wintering grounds from Panama south to the Andes. They begin returning to Washington during the last days of April and continue arriving until June.	olive-sided_flycatcher	OSFL			
148	68	Contopus	sordidulus	Western Wood-Pewee	Common summer resident east. Fairly common west.	LC	Two subspecies of Western Wood-Pewee are found in Washington, divided by the Cascade Mountains. While in general this species is widespread and abundant, populations are declining in many areas. Declines have been attributed to loss and degradation of habitat on both the breeding grounds and the wintering grounds. Creation of clearings attracts this species, which shuns dense forests. Thus it may inhabit edges of clear-cuts for 5 to 10 years, then vanish as new growth develops. Forest fragmentation creates additional edge habitat and may result in increased populations. Cattle grazing appears to degrade habitat.	The Western Wood-Pewee is a small, nondescript, gray bird with two lighter wing-bars and no eye-ring. It has a whitish throat, dark bill, and slight crest.		1	Western Wood-Pewees use a variety of habitats, including open coniferous forests, wooded streams, and forest edges.	Western Wood-Pewees are most common in eastern Washington at lower elevations, within the forested zone. They can be found in western Washington, especially in some of the dry areas in the San Juan Islands (especially Lopez Island) and on the northeastern Olympic Peninsula. Look for them in clear-cuts. They are also common along the coast, at Grays Harbor and Willapa Bay.	These active foragers concentrate in the sub-canopy layer, flying out from an exposed perch to grab prey in mid-air, and then returning to the perch. They also hover beside foliage, gleaning prey from the surface of leaves and twigs.	Flying insects are the predominant prey.	Widespread and fairly common in forested zones at low and middle elevations west of Cascade crest. On Eastside, fairly common to common in similar mid-elevation habitats. More likely to be found in riparian woodlands and somewhat drier, more open conifer forest.	The male sings to defend a nesting territory and attract a mate. The female builds the nest on a horizontal branch, usually well out from the trunk. The nest is a compact cup of grass, plant fiber, feathers, and hair in a spider-web frame, at varying heights from the ground. The outside of the nest is camouflaged with moss, bud scales, leaves, and lichen, and often looks like a bump or knot on the branch. Typically, clutches are three eggs, but can be from two to four eggs. The female incubates the eggs for 14 to 15 days. Both parents help feed the young, which fledge at about 16 days, and leave the nest area within three days of fledging.	Western Wood-Pewees spend the winter in northern and western South America and are late returnees to the Northwest. They generally arrive in mid-May and depart in late August and September.	western_wood-pewee	WEWP			
149	18	Corvus	brachyrhynchos	American Crow	Common resident.	LC	American Crows are abundant throughout the United States, despite earlier attempts to eradicate them. They are well adapted to life among humans. Their numbers are increasing in Washington, especially in urban areas such as Seattle. They were absent in the Columbia Basin until recently, but with the proliferation of orchards and of urban plantings that provide nesting trees, American Crows have spread into this part of Washington as well. The spread and increase of American Crows adversely affects a number of other species that are not able to compete with the aggressive and adaptable crow.	American Crows are shiny, black birds with strong, stout bills. They can be distinguished from Common Ravens by their smaller size, their straight to slightly rounded tails (seen from below, ravens' tails are wedge-shaped), and their higher-pitched calls. Ravens also have more massive bills and longer, shaggier feathers at their throats. American Crows are larger than the closely related Northwestern Crows but have higher pitched voices.		1	American Crows inhabit a wide variety of semi-open habitats. They can generally be found in any habitat in Washington, except unbroken coniferous forest, as long as it has suitable nesting trees. They are usually tolerant of the presence of humans.	American Crows can be found year round in the proper habitat throughout Washington, except in alpine snowfields and in coastal areas occupied by Northwestern Crows if, in fact, the two are separate species (see Northwestern Crow.) They are relatively uncommon in eastern Washington away from urban areas.	Outside of the breeding season, American Crows are sociable and form large winter roosts. Crows are intelligent and opportunistic, and they quickly take advantage of new sources of food. They generally feed on the ground and are often found feeding along roadsides and at garbage dumps. They will drop hard-shelled items on hard surfaces such as roads or rocks to break them open. Crows can be aggressive toward other birds, mobbing ravens or raptors in flight.	Omnivores, American Crows eat just about anything, including garbage, carrion, seeds, the eggs and young of other birds, marshmallows, and invertebrates.	Common in open habitats throughout four-county area, including cities, suburbs, farmlands, and managed forests. Absent from montane forested zones except along highway corridors and, by and large, from shrub-steppe east and south of Kittitas Valley. Populations along Puget Sound intergradient with Northwestern Crow <i>(C. caurinus)</i> inhabiting outer coast from Washington north. Extensive forest clearing following Euro-American settlement likely eliminated habitat barriers between original Northwestern Crow populations of Puget Sound and American Crow populations to east and south, fostering interbreeding to point that these two forms now indistinguishable in our area.	American Crows are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds. Sometimes one of the offspring from a previous year stays with the pair to help feed the nestlings. Both members of the pair build the nest, which is a bulky stick platform, lined with mud, moss, grass, and feathers, usually in the canopy of a tree. The female incubates 4-6 eggs for about 18 days. She broods the young continuously at first and then helps the male bring food. The young  venture out of the nest onto nearby branches at first and begin to fledge at about 4-5 weeks.	American Crows are mostly permanent residents, although they may migrate from northern regions in the fall. Flocks gather in large winter roosts, which may draw some birds short distances from their breeding areas.	american_crow	AMCR			
150	18	Corvus	caurinus	Northwestern Crow		LC	Northwestern Crows are common, and the population is most likely stable.  Their historic range has expanded due to the clearing of coastal forests.  Many authorities in Washington consider the Northwestern Crow to be a subspecies of the American Crow, not a separate species. (Genetic work will be published soon.)  Size and vocalizations are typically considered to be the distinguishing factors between the two species, and there are considerable overlaps between the two species on both factors. The main threat is that Northwestern Crows intergrade freely with American Crows wherever the two come into contact. Thus Northwestern Crows get swamped and are not distinguishable.	Northwestern Crows are large, shiny, black birds with long, solid bills.  They can be distinguished from Common Ravens by their smaller size, straight or slightly rounded tails, and higher-pitched voices.  Ravens also have more massive bills and longer, shaggier feathers at their throats.  Northwestern Crows are smaller than the closely related American Crows and have lower, huskier voices.  Many authorities believe that the Northwestern Crow is not a true species, but a subspecies of the American Crow.		1	Northwestern Crows are typically associated with tidal areas.  They are generally found in semi-open habitats such as rocky beaches, forested shorelines, tidal estuaries, and coastal ponds, around seabird colonies and garbage dumps, and in towns, cities, and campgrounds.  They often nest near intertidal flats.	Northwestern Crows can be found year round in coastal Washington and Puget Sound.	Outside the breeding season, Northwestern Crows are quite sociable, roosting and foraging in large flocks. They are intelligent and opportunistic, and quickly take advantage of new sources of food. They generally feed on the ground or in shallow water. They drop hard-shelled items onto hard surfaces, such as rocks and roads, to break them open. Northwestern Crows foraging in intertidal areas often store extra food during low tide, when it is plentiful, and consume it during the following high tide, when the intertidal zone is under water.	Northwestern Crows are omnivores.  Because they live in coastal areas, much of their diet is aquatic creatures, shellfish, fish, seabird eggs, and various aquatic invertebrates. They also eat carrion and garbage.		Northwestern Crows are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds.  Sometimes one of the offspring from a previous year stays with the pair to help feed the nestlings.  Both members of the pair help build the nest, which is a bulky, stick platform, lined with mud, moss, grass, rootlets, and cedar bark.  The nest is usually in the canopy of a tree, but can also be in a shrub or on the ground.  The female incubates 3-6 eggs (usually four) for 17-20 days.  The female broods the young constantly for about four days, and then helps the male and helper bring food.  The young start venturing out of the nest onto nearby branches at 26-33 days, and then begin to fledge about three days later (typically at 29-35 days).  The young stay on the parents' territory for another couple of weeks, and are fed by the parents for a few weeks after leaving the territory.	Northwestern Crows are not considered to migrate.	northwestern_crow	NOCR			
151	18	Corvus	corax	Common Raven	Common resident.	LC	Most western populations of the Common Raven have been stable for many years, but the population in the eastern portion of their range suffered a significant decline in the early 20th Century. Habitat loss, the loss of bison, the increase of crows, and human harassment all contributed to this decline. During the second half of the 20th Century, populations rebounded, and Common Ravens are returning to much of their former range. Ravens have been blamed for some of the decline of a number of species of concern, including California Condor, Marbled Murrelet, Least Tern, Snowy Plover, Sandhill Crane, and Sage Grouse, the eggs and young of all of which are preyed upon by Common Ravens. Some control measures have been proposed or are in place in some areas to try to reduce the ravens' impact. Common Ravens avoid cities in Washington, perhaps because of earlier harassment by humans, competition with increasingly abundant crows, and lack of appropriate nest sites.	Common Ravens are large, black birds, with strong, heavy bills. They look rather like American Crows but are much larger and can weigh more than four times as much. When size isn't enough to distinguish the two species, look for the heavier bill and the shaggy feathers around the raven's throat. In flight, the raven shows a wedge-shaped tail from below, unlike the crow, which has a slightly rounded tail. Its wings are longer and less rounded, reminding one of a raptor. Ravens also typically soar and glide, while crows tend to flap continuously and fly in a direct path. Ravens are usually seen in pairs or small family groups rather than in the large flocks that crows often form.		1	Common Ravens can be found in a wide variety of habitats. They inhabit dense forests, open sagebrush country, and alpine parklands. In Washington, they avoid cities but are common in cities in other areas. They prefer heavily contoured landscapes, perhaps because this type of habitat produces thermals that ravens use on their long-distance foraging trips.	Common Ravens are fairly common and widespread throughout the year in non-urban areas of Washington. They are generally absent from the developed corridor from Stanwood to Olympia (Snohomish-King-Pierce-Thurston Counties) and from the Vancouver (Clark County) area. They are most common east of the Cascade Crest but at times are common along Washington's outer coast.	Common Ravens are most often found in pairs or in small groups, but they roost together in large groups in winter and large congregations may form at garbage dumps and other food bonanzas. Juveniles and non-breeders sometimes forage in small groups.  They are very intelligent and sometimes cooperate to flush out prey when hunting. Ravens usually feed on the ground but will also feed in trees, often raiding other birds' nests. One of their many calls is a deep, distinctive croaking, often given in flight.	Common Ravens are omnivores, but most of their diet is meat.  At times they eat arthropods, seeds, and grain, but they are more carnivorous than crows. They scavenge for carrion and garbage and also prey on rodents and on the eggs and nestlings of other birds.	Breeds throughout, although somewhat locally. Greatest densities in dry, open forests, farm- and rangelands, and shrub-steppe of Kittitas County. Fairly common in forests and valleys of west slope of Cascades from foothills to middle elevations, but rare or absent in high, humid montane forests on both sides of Cascade crest north of Snoqualmie Pass. In Puget Trough lowlands, uncommon in Kitsap and Island Counties but absent from western King County. However, reports from metropolitan zone increasing since close of BBA period. Pair nested in Kirkland (suburban King County) in 2003.	Common Ravens usually do not breed until they are 2-4 years old. They are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds. Pairs typically stay together year round, roosting near one another at night. Historically, they used cliffs and trees as nesting sites. Now power poles, bridges, and other man-made structures are commonly used. Nest sites are often re-used for many years. The nest usually consists of a base of large sticks woven into a bulky basket with a cup of smaller branches and twigs inside. The cup is then lined with mud, fur, bark, grass, and paper. The female (possibly with help from the male) incubates 3-7 (usually 5 or 6) eggs for about 20 days. The male feeds the female on the nest and helps her brood the young when they first hatch. The young leave the nest after 4-7 weeks. At this time, they can fly short distances and usually stay close to the nest for another week or so.	Common Ravens do not migrate, although some northern birds wander south in the fall and winter.	common_raven	CORA			
152	54	Coturnicops	noveboracensis	Yellow Rail		LC		Two old records, one in spring from Columbia Basin (Adams County), one in fall on Skagit delta (Skagit County).		1								yellow_rail				
153	18	Cyanocitta	cristata	Blue Jay	Rare winter resident.	LC	Blue Jays are well adapted to living with humans and take advantage of the increasing edge habitat created by suburban development.  These jays are common throughout their range (which has not included Washington until recently), and they are expanding into the Northwest.  This expansion has been attributed to urbanization, feeding stations, and population increases to the northeast, in Canada.  Blue Jays have become more and more regular in Washington within the past 20 years, including some invasion years with multiple birds sighted.	Blue Jays are expanding their range into Washington. These birds have bright, colorful, contrasting plumage.  The back is mostly blue, and the underside is mostly white or light gray.  The Blue Jay has a white face and throat, with a black necklace extending up to the base of its blue crest.  Its blue wings are barred with black.  It has one white wing-bar on each wing and white tips on the inner trailing edges of its wings.  The Blue Jay also has a white edge at the end of its tail.  Juveniles look similar to adults.		1	Blue Jays are most often found in deciduous or mixed woods in suburban and park-like areas.  They tend to avoid pure conifer stands and deep forest, preferring edge habitats.	Blue Jays are rare fall and winter visitors in Washington.  A few birds have reached the western Washington lowlands, and even the outer coast, but they are most often seen in eastern Washington.  Sightings are now annual in the Walla Walla and Spokane areas.	Blue Jays live in loosely organized flocks and defend only the nest site, not traditional territories.  When they are raising young or robbing nests, they are very quiet and inconspicuous.  These intelligent and opportunistic birds are quick to take advantage of new food sources including bird feeders, where they may become aggressive and exclude other birds.  They cache extra acorns in holes in the ground, and pound on hard nuts with their bills to break them open.  They forage at various heights, from the ground into the trees.  Blue Jays are highly vocal outside of the nesting season.  They have a wide repertoire of musical vocalizations and can mimic Red-tailed Hawks well.	Omnivores, Blue Jays will eat almost anything.  Nuts, seeds, and other vegetable matter make up the majority of their diet, but they also eat eggs and nestlings, invertebrates, small rodents, frogs, and carrion.		Blue Jays form monogamous pairs and stay together year round.  They typically nest in a horizontal fork or vertical crotch of a tree. Both members of the pair help build the nest.  The nest is a bulky cup made of twigs torn from live trees, grass, moss, bark, lichen, and leaves, sometimes held together with mud.  The nest is usually lined with rootlets and other fine debris, and is often decorated on the outside with paper, string, or other light-colored material.  The female typically incubates 4-6 eggs for 17-18 days.  Both members of the pair feed the young, which leave the nest at 17-21 days and spend their first few days out of the nest in nearby branches before fledging.	Blue Jays are year-round residents across most of their range, but some northern birds do migrate south in the fall.  Their migration pattern is not well understood.	blue_jay	BLJA			
154	18	Cyanocitta	stelleri	Steller's Jay	Fairly common resident.	LC	Steller's Jays have expanded into a wider variety of habitats within the past 20 years, and are now more common in towns and cities than they previously were.  Development and forestry both generally benefit Steller's Jays, and the Christmas Bird Count and the Breeding Bird Survey have recorded increases in Washington in recent years.  Two subspecies are found in Washington, divided by the Cascade Mountains.  Steller's Jays are not found breeding or wintering in some parts of Seattle (and possibly other urban areas), probably due to the impact from expanding crow populations.	The Steller's Jay is a striking bird with deep blue and black plumage and a long, shaggy crest.  The front of its body is black, and the rear is deep blue.  The black extends midway down its back and down its breast.  It has faint, dark barring on its wings.  Adults have blue vertical 'eyebrows' above each eye.  The juvenile appears similar to the adult, but has a slightly browner head and lacks the blue eyebrows of the adult. The inland form has a small white patch over the eye.		1	Steller's Jays breed primarily in dense conifer forests, but they use a wider variety of forested habitats at other times of year.  They can be found from low to moderate elevations.  They are common in treed residential areas and agricultural areas with adjacent forests.  They breed up to the tree line, particularly in open or fragmented forests, but are typically found at lower elevations than are Gray Jays.	Steller's Jays can be found year round in forested areas throughout Washington.  They are more common than they were previously on the Olympic Peninsula, due to expanded development.	Steller's Jays form flocks outside of the nesting season and often fly across clearings in single file. They are highly vocal outside of the nesting season.  When they are raising young or robbing nests, Steller's Jays become very quiet and inconspicuous.  They are well known at feeders, picnic areas, and campgrounds where they beg boldly for handouts with loud, raspy calls.  These intelligent and opportunistic birds are quick to take advantage of new food sources, including bird feeders, especially those full of peanuts.  They cache extra nuts, making sure that the food is covered from all directions.  They pound on hard nuts with their bills to break them open.  They forage primarily in trees, but may forage lower at times.  Steller's Jays have complex social hierarchies and dominance patterns.	Steller's Jays are omnivores, and their diets are about 2/3 vegetable-matter and 1/3 animal-matter.  The vegetable portion of their diet consists of seeds, nuts, berries, and fruits, and the animal-matter portion consists of bird eggs and nestlings, invertebrates, suet, small rodents, reptiles, and carrion.  They eat almost any scraps that humans give them. They appear to be major predators of other species' eggs.	Common in variety of forested habitats and open or fragmented landscapes within forested zones at low to moderate elevations and into alpine parkland. Found in hardwood, coniferous, and mixed forests, and in residential and agricultural areas in forested landscapes. Breeds throughout our four-county area with exception of arid steppe zone in eastern Kittitas County.	Steller's Jays form monogamous, long-term pair bonds.  They remain together year round.  They typically nest in a conifer, and both members of the pair help build the nest.  The nest is a bulky cup made of twigs, weeds, moss, and leaves, held together with mud.  The nest is usually lined with rootlets, pine needles, and other fine material, often with bits of paper adorning the outside.  The female typically incubates 4-5 eggs for 16-18 days.  Both members of the pair feed the young, which leave the nest at about 16 days.  They begin making short flights within a few days of fledging, and can make sustained flights by the age of 30 days, which is about when they begin to find their own food.  The adults continue to provide some food for the fledglings for about a month after they fledge.	Steller's Jays are generally considered resident, but some migration does occur in the fall and spring.  A number of birds wander into higher altitudes in the fall, and in winter, higher-elevation birds often move down-slope.	stellers_jay	STJA			
155	6	Cygnus	buccinator	Trumpeter Swan	Common winter west. Rare east.	LC	Trumpeter Swans once nested over most of North America but disappeared rapidly due to human development and hunting practices.  By the 1930s, fewer than 100 Trumpeter Swans remained south of Canada.  With habitat preservation, protection from hunting, and reintroduction efforts, Trumpeter Swans have experienced a comeback, especially in the Northwest. They are now found in greater numbers in Washington than anywhere else in the contiguous United States. Of the over 15,000 individuals estimated in North America, more than 2,000 were counted in Skagit County during the 1999-2000 hunting season. Populations are still increasing and expanding their range to other counties in Washington, but they are not without threat. Habitat loss is still an issue, as is lead poisoning. Trumpeter Swans ingest lead shot as grit to help digest hard grains, and as few as three pellets can kill a Trumpeter Swan. Although lead shot is banned for hunting waterfowl in both the US and Canada, it can still be used for hunting upland birds and for trap shooting, which occurs in some of the areas where Trumpeter Swans winter. Swan die-offs from lead poisoning occur periodically.  In 1992 a number of poisoned Trumpeter Swans were found, and in 1999-2000, at least 87 died. Since 2000, hundreds of Trumpeter Swans have died of lead poisoning in Whatcom County. The source of the lead shot is not known, but wildlife officials are trying to identify the source, so that they can remove it and prevent this from occurring in the future. Ailing Trumpeter Swans must be removed, as scavengers can also get lead poisoning from preying on poisoned swans.	The largest of the North American native waterfowl and one of our heaviest flying birds, the Trumpeter Swan is large and white. It holds its long neck straight up, often with a kink at the base. The bill is black, and there is no coloration in front of the eyes. The juvenile is dusky-gray, with a mottled dark-and-light bill that is black at the base. The juvenile plumage persists until at least spring migration, which helps distinguish the Trumpeter Swan from the Tundra Swan.		1	Trumpeter Swans inhabit lakes, ponds, large rivers, and coastal bays. They were historically more common in fresh water than salt water, but this is no longer the case. Their most important habitat requirements are open water, access to food, and protection from disturbance.	Trumpeter Swans spend the winter from November to April in the open fields and estuaries of Skagit and Whatcom Counties. Padilla Bay, Samish Bay, and Samish Flats are all areas that Trumpeter Swans frequent. Recently, this range has expanded to Grays Harbor and other areas of western Washington. They are uncommon in similar habitats in eastern Washington during winter. There are currently no Trumpeter Swans breeding in Washington, but a pair has been seen during the breeding season at the Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge (Spokane County) since 1994, and they may breed in coming years.	Trumpeter Swans forage on water and, especially in winter, on land. Their long necks allow them to forage for submergent vegetation without diving. They are a long-lived, social species.	Plant material makes up most of their diet. Adults eat stems, leaves, and roots of aquatic plants, switching to upland grasses and waste grain in the winter. Washington birds eat cultivated tubers such as sweet potatoes.  Young birds feed primarily on insects and other invertebrates, especially in the first weeks after hatching.		Trumpeter Swans don't usually nest until they are 4 to 7 years old, but they begin forming their long-term pair bonds at 2 to 4 years of age. Nests are surrounded by water, on islands, beaver or muskrat lodges, or on floating vegetation. Both male and female help build the nest (although the female does most of the work). The nest is a low mound of plant matter several feet across, with a depression in the middle. The nest may be reused from year to year. The females lays 4 to 5 eggs and does most of the incubation herself, although the male may help. The male guards the female and the nest while she is incubating. Incubation lasts for 32 to 37 days. The young are able to swim and feed themselves almost immediately after hatching. The parents tend them and lead them to feeding sites, where the young feed themselves. The young fly at about 3-4 months.	Most southern populations are non-migratory, while northern populations move south in late fall as water begins to freeze. Most migration takes place during the day, and flocks fly low overhead in a V-formation. Migration starts early in spring, and birds often return to the breeding grounds before the water is free of ice.	trumpeter_swan	TRUS			
156	6	Cygnus	columbianus	Tundra Swan	Common winter west. Fairly common east.	LC	The most numerous and widespread of the North American swans, the Tundra Swan is less affected by human settlement than the larger Trumpeter Swan. Destruction of wetlands in the winter range has reduced former food sources, but the Tundra Swan has adapted by shifting its winter habitat to agricultural fields. Lead poisoning has long been a problem for this species, because ingesting only a few lead pellets can kill a swan. This usually affects only a few birds, but large die-offs have occurred. The population appears stable. Limited hunting occurs in some western states, but not Washington.	Known by many in North America as the Whistling Swan, the Tundra Swan is a large, white bird, with a long neck held straight up. It has a black bill with yellow patches in front of its eyes, although the yellow is not always present. The juvenile is gray with a pink bill and black legs, but it becomes whiter through the winter because of continuous molting. Males and females look alike.		1	Tundra Swans nest in the wet Arctic tundra and are generally found near the coast. During migration and through the winter, they inhabit shallow lakes, slow-moving rivers, flooded fields, and coastal estuaries. When Trumpeter Swans first reappeared in Washington, there was a habitat separation between the two swans, with the Trumpeters on fresh water and Tundras on salt water. This separation is no longer seen, and mixed flocks are common.	Tundra Swans are common in fresh- and saltwater habitats throughout the lowlands of northwestern Washington from November to April. Almost 2,000 winter in Skagit County. In eastern Washington, wintering swans are present, but less common, from mid-November to mid-March, and are more common during migration (mid-March to mid-April, and mid-October to mid-November). Small flocks come through the Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge (Spokane County), and about a thousand winter at the Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge (Clark County) along the Columbia River.	During the breeding season, Tundra Swans forage mostly on the water, using their long necks to reach as much as three feet below the water's surface. During migration and in winter, much of their feeding is on land in fields. A long-lived species, they form long-term pair bonds.	Historically Tundra Swans ate invertebrates and submerged, aquatic vegetation, but severe declines in this food at migratory stopover and wintering areas have led the swans to shift to a winter diet of mostly grains and cultivated tubers left in agricultural fields through the winter. In summer, their diet consists of new shoots, tubers, and seeds.		Nests are located near a lake or other open water, in an area with good visibility. Both parents help build the nest, which is a large, low mound of plant material with a depression in the center. The pair may reuse the nest from year to year. The female incubates the 4 to 5 eggs for about a month, with the male assisting.  After the eggs hatch, both parents tend the young, leading them to sources of food where the young feed themselves. They first fly at 2 to 3 months, but stay with the parents at least through the first winter.	Tundra Swans migrate long distances in family groups. They leave the nesting area in late summer and stage in nearby estuaries before heading to the wintering grounds in mid-fall. In the spring, the birds make shorter flights with more stopovers than in the fall.	tundra_swan				
157	6	Cygnus	olor	Mute Swan	Invasive (controlled).	LC	Domestic swans were first brought from Europe in the mid-1800s as an ornament for parks and estates. Feral populations have been established in much of the Northeast and in some parts of the Pacific Northwest. In the Northeast, many consider the Mute Swan a pest because it overgrazes ponds and excludes native waterfowl. Others consider it a beautiful addition to the avifauna, and much controversy has surrounded control efforts. Mute Swan populations in the Pacific Northwest&#8212;closely monitored by wildlife agencies&#8212do not seem to be growing or expanding quickly, and thus have not yet become a management issue.	The Mute Swan is a very large, completely white bird with a long neck held in an S-curve. The bill is orange with a black knob at its base. Juveniles are gray or white, with the white morph more common.		1	A native of Eurasia, the adaptable Mute Swan inhabits fresh- and saltwater ponds, coastal lagoons, and bays. It is often found in close association with people, but occasionally lives in remote areas as well.	Mute Swans are very rare in Washington, but birds are occasionally sighted. These birds may be from populations in British Columbia. While no Mute Swans have bred in Washington in recent years, there are both captive and feral populations in southwestern British Columbia, and expansion into Washington is certainly possible. Mute Swans were first introduced in Vancouver around 1889, but the population did not become established until the 1950s. Winter-feeding and mild winters may be necessary for their survival. The only established feral population is on southern Vancouver Island from Duncan to Sooke. Humans providing food and shelter maintain other populations in the area, including Vancouver's Stanley Park and other urban ponds.	Mute Swans graze while walking on land, and feed on submergent, aquatic vegetation by reaching under the water with their long necks.  They also adapt to feeding by humans. Highly territorial, males will aggressively defend their large territories against their own and other species, including humans, displaying, hissing, and attacking when provoked.	Mute Swans eat aquatic plant material, grasses, and waste grain. They also eat insects, snails, and other small aquatic creatures.		Mute Swans usually form pairs at the age of two, but do not start breeding until their third or fourth year. The male gathers nesting material, and the female builds a shallow mound on a shoreline. The nest is large, five to six feet in diameter, and made of grasses and reeds with a shallow depression. The female performs most of the incubation of the four to six eggs, although the male will step in and allow the female to take breaks for foraging. Incubation lasts for about 36 days, and both adults tend the young, which sometimes ride on their parents' backs. The young begin to fly at 4 to 5 months but usually remain with the parents through the first winter.	Non-migratory in North America, Mute Swans may make short-distance, seasonal movements dictated by the weather.	mute_swan				
158	7	Cypseloides	niger	Black Swift	Fairly common summer resident.	VU	Black Swifts are fairly common but patchily distributed, with apparently stable numbers.  Because of the difficulty in locating and observing nests, this species' ecology is not well known.	The Black Swift is the largest of Washington's swifts. It has a streamlined body with long, narrow wings. Compared to Vaux's Swift, the Black Swift has a longer and broader tail, often held in a fan, and its wing beats are much slower. Adults are solid black with slightly lighter under-wings. Males have a notch in their tails. Juveniles have white scaling on their bellies.		1	Black Swifts require a specialized habitat for nesting, in forested areas near rivers. Nests are often located behind waterfalls or on damp cliffs, where the environment is dark, wet, steep, and inaccessible to predators, and which provides the swifts with an unobstructed flyway to approach the nest. This highly specialized nesting habitat results in patchy distribution of Black Swifts. Like other swifts, they are far more general in their foraging habitats than in their nesting habitat, and while foraging, they are seen in the open sky over mountainous areas and on coastal cliffs.	The Black Swift is an uncommon breeder in forested habitats at moderate elevations in the northern Cascades (both east and west sides north of Snoqualmie Pass) and possibly along the rocky coastline from Point Grenville (Grays Harbor County) to Cape Flattery (Clallam County). It may well breed in the other mountain ranges in the state, although this is undocumented.  The long distances Black Swifts travel to forage and the obscurity of their nests make it difficult to ascertain where they are nesting. During the breeding season, Black Swifts have been sighted as far south as Mount Adams and into the Puget Sound lowlands, including the San Juan Islands, and east as far as Ferry County.  Look for them around lowland fresh water in June on overcast mornings, when they are driven from the clouded-in mountains.	Black Swifts forage exclusively in the air, flying fast and high, singly or in flocks. During courtship, pairs perform long aerial chases and mate in mid-air.	Black Swifts eat flying insects.	Fairly common but local in Cascades on both sides of crest. No confirmed records in BBA period but known to nest on inaccessible cliffs, usually behind waterfalls. Mapped records limited to birds foraging aerially in Cascades and foothills, although birds frequently observed in lowlands as well. Clusters of records perhaps indicative of nearby nesting include Green River Valley above Howard Hanson Reservoir, South Fork Skykomish drainage from Baring to Stevens Pass, high Cascades north from Snoqualmie Pass, Gold Creek Valley, upper Kachess River, upper Cle Elum River, North Fork Teanaway River, and Lookout Mountain/Windy Pass vicinity.	One of the latest of Washington's breeding birds, Black Swifts may nest singly or in small colonies. A sheltered ledge or crevice on a cliff or behind a waterfall is chosen as a nest site. The inaccessible-to-humans nest is a small saucer made of mud, moss, and ferns, fastened to the edge of the crevice. Nests may be reused from year to year, with more material added each year. Nests behind waterfalls are continuously damp from spray. The female lays a single egg, and both parents incubate for 3½ to 4 weeks. Both parents feed and care for the single young, which remains in the nest until it is ready to fly at about 45-49 days old. The nesting period coincides with the emergence of flying ants--a brief, but abundant source of nutritious food--in late August or early September.	A summer resident in Washington, the Black Swift arrives in late spring and departs in early fall. The winter range is not well known.	black_swift	BLSW			
159	46	Dendragapus	fuliginosus	Sooty Grouse	Fairly common resident.	LC	The Sooty Grouse&#8217;s rugged, mountainous habitat has helped protect it, although it is still vulnerable to habitat alteration and loss. It is popular as a game bird, but surveys indicate that hunting has had little permanent impact on population levels. Fall migration into dense forest may be a factor in reducing hunting mortality. Logging of coastal forests typically results in a boom-and-bust cycle of Sooty Grouse populations, with explosive increases after clear-cutting followed by steep declines as the replacement forest closes its canopy. Sooty Grouse do much less well in even-aged tree farms compared with old-growth forest. Sooty Grouse still occupy most of their original range, although they once inhabited the Puget Trough from Seattle to Portland. Deforestation for development and agriculture has eliminated habitat for Sooty Grouse in this area.	In 2006, the American Ornithologists&#8217; Union split the species formerly known as Blue Grouse into two species: Dusky Grouse and Sooty Grouse. The two new species are the same size and resemble one another closely. In Washington, separating them can be challenging in the zone where their ranges meet on the east slope of the north Cascades (see below). The most useful field mark for the male Sooty is the broad gray terminal band on the dark tail; the male Dusky&#8217;s tail is all-dark with no more than a touch of gray at the very tips of the tail feathers. The air sacs on the male&#8217;s neck, visible when expanded in display, are yellow in Sooty and purplish-red in Dusky. Females of the two species are nearly impossible to separate in the field, although Sooty females are slightly darker and more uniformly brown (less gray) on average.		1	In the breeding season, Sooty Grouse of the coastal population (subspecies <I>D.f. fuliginosus</I>) inhabit wet conifer forest from sea level to the subalpine and alpine zones at openings and edges that provide a well-developed understory vegetation of grasses, herbs, and shrubs. The population along the east slope of the south Cascades (subspecies <I>D.f. sierrae</I>) inhabits generally drier forests similar to those utilized by Dusky Grouse. Both populations winter in dense conifer stands, often at a higher elevation than their breeding habitat.	Sooty Grouse are fairly common in mixed and coniferous forests at all elevations throughout their range, with the exception of the Puget lowlands where they are now only found locally in forested foothills as well as in the remnant forests and grasslands near Fort Lewis (Pierce County). Two subspecies of Sooty Grouse are found in Washington. The range of the interior subspecies <I>(D.f. sierrae)</I> lies along the east slopes of the south Cascades in southern Kittitas, Yakima, and Klickitat counties, from the crest down to the edge of the shrub-steppe zone. The range of the coastal subspecies <I>(D.f. fuliginosa)</I> is west of the Cascade crest, spilling across onto the upper east slopes of the north Cascades in Okanogan, Chelan, and northern Kittitas counties where it meets the range of Dusky Grouse in a substantial but poorly understood zone of overlap. Most birds in the wetter, higher-elevation forests are Sooty Grouse, while most of those farther downslope in drier, more open forest, grassland, and shrub-steppe are Dusky Grouse. However, many birds in this ill-defined transition zone show hybrid characteristics.	Sooty Grouse are usually found singly, not in flocks (except for hens with young), and are generally fairly wary. Males typically sing from high up in a coniferous tree, perched on a branch next to the trunk. The song, which is both louder and higher-pitched than that of Dusky Grouse, is a series of six deep-toned hoots that can carry as much as half a mile. To attract females, males also strut with tails raised and fanned, and neck feathers spread, revealing patches of bright skin.	In summer, Sooty Grouse feed on the ground on leaves, flowers, buds, berries, conifer needles, and insects. In winter, they forage in trees for needles of pines, firs, and other conifers. In the western Cascades, 60 percent of their diet is made up of fir and Douglas-fir needles. Young birds eat mostly insects, especially in the first 10 days of life.		Females provide all parental care. Nests are a shallow scrape in the ground, sometimes with little or no cover, sparsely lined with dead twigs, needles, leaves, and feathers. Females lay and incubate 1&#8211;12 (normally 4&#8211;9) buffy, lightly speckled eggs. The young leave the nest within a day after hatching. Females tend the young, but do not feed them.	During late summer and early autumn, many Sooty Grouse move from open breeding areas to dense conifer forests at higher elevations; this altitudinal migration is typically a short distance, but can be as much as 30 miles, much of which is undertaken on foot. Birds leave their breeding grounds by October and return by early April. However, populations in mature forests near the coast may winter on their breeding territories.	sooty_grouse				
160	46	Dendragapus	obscurus	Dusky Grouse	Fairly common resident.	LC	The Dusky Grouse still occupies all or nearly all of its original range in Washington. Although it is vulnerable to habitat loss from activities such as grazing and logging, most of its range is in rugged mountains or other territory sparsely settled by humans. It is popular as a game bird, but its fall migration into dense forest reduces hunting mortality.	Dusky Grouse are larger than Ruffed or Spruce Grouse, and have relatively long necks and tails. They are grayish or gray-brown in color with cryptic patterning. The female&#8217;s plumage is overall mottled brownish. The male is similar but usually darker, with solid blue-gray feathering on the underparts, orange-yellow combs over the eyes, and all-dark tail feathers. In display, purplish-red fleshy patches can be seen at the neck. In 2006, the former Blue Grouse was split into two species by the American Ornithologists&#8217; Union: Dusky Grouse and Sooty Grouse. Washington is the only state in the United States where the ranges of these two very similar species meet. Please also see the Sooty Grouse account in BirdWeb for further details.		1	In the breeding season Dusky Grouse inhabit open, relatively dry mixed and conifer forest from the ponderosa pine zone to the subalpine fir zone, and adjacent shrub-steppe, grassland, aspen groves, and alpine meadows. In lodgepole pine and Engelmann spruce forests at elevations above 5,000 feet, they may be largely, but not entirely, replaced by Spruce Grouse. They winter in dense conifer stands, often at a higher elevation than their breeding habitat.	Dusky Grouse is a bird of the Rocky Mountains and the Intermountain West. In Washington, it is found in three distinct areas separated by the vast expanse of the largely unforested Columbia Plateau and Okanogan River valley&#8212;the east slopes of the north Cascades in Okanogan, Chelan, and northern Kittitas counties; the Okanogan Highlands and Selkirk Mountains of the northeast; and the Blue Mountains of the southeast. Dusky Grouse is locally fairly common in all three of these areas in suitable habitat, mostly at middle elevations but extending up to tree line in the subalpine zone in some localities. The ranges of Dusky Grouse and Sooty Grouse meet and overlap on the east slope of the Cascades, creating a zone of confusion between the two species. Most birds in the wetter, higher-elevation forests are Sooty Grouse, while most of those farther downslope in drier, more open forest, grassland, and shrub-steppe are Dusky Grouse. However, many birds in this ill-defined transition zone show hybrid characteristics.	Dusky Grouse are usually found singly, not in flocks (except for hens with young), and are generally fairly wary. Males sing from the ground or from a low perch such as a stump. The usual song is a series of five soft, very low-pitched hoots that can rarely be heard beyond 100 feet. To attract females, males also strut with tails raised and fanned, and neck feathers spread, revealing patches of bright skin.	In summer, Dusky Grouse feed on the ground on leaves, flowers, buds, berries, conifer needles, and insects. In winter, they forage in trees for needles of pines, firs, and other conifers. In many parts of their Washington range larch and pine needles are the predominant food source. Young birds eat mostly insects, especially in the first 10 days of life.	Fairly common throughout Cascades in conifer-dominated forests at all elevations; also in forested southwestern Kitsap County but absent from Island County. In 2006  (<i>Auk</i> 123:926-936), American Ornithologists&rsquo; Union split Blue Grouse into two species, Sooty Grouse (<i>D. fuliginosus</i>) along Pacific Coast and Dusky Grouse (<i>D. obscurus</i>) of Rockies and Intermountain West. Although BBA surveyors did not separate these forms, birds along and west of Cascade crest are unquestionably Sooty. Situation east of crest less clear, but birds in Wenatchee Mountains from Teanaway Basin east appear to be Dusky, and those on ridges west of Ellensburg, Sooty (M. Schroeder, pers. comm.).	Females provide all parental care. Nests are a shallow scrape in the ground, sometimes with little or no cover, sparsely lined with dead twigs, needles, leaves, and feathers. Females lay and incubate 1&#8211;12 buffy, lightly speckled eggs (normally 4&#8211;9). The young leave the nest within a day after hatching. Females tend the young, but do not feed them.	During late summer and early autumn, Dusky Grouse move from open breeding areas to dense conifer forests at higher elevations; this altitudinal migration is typically a short distance, but can be as much as 30 miles, much of which is undertaken on foot. Most grouse leave their breeding grounds by October and return by early April.	dusky_grouse				
161	46	Dendrocygna	bicolor	Fulvous Whistling-Duck	Accidental visitor. Washington Bird Records Committee review list species.	LC		Sometimes called tree-ducks, the whistling-ducks compose a unique group of eight species of worldwide distribution, mostly in the tropics. They are distinctive for their long-legged, long-necked, rather chunky appearance. Of the two species that reach the United States only one, the Fulvous Whistling-Duck, has been recorded in Washington. Its rich, tawny-colored underparts contrast with a darker back; all-dark wings and a broad white band across the rump stand out in flight.

This species typically favors open, shallow freshwater habitats such as marshes, reed-fringed ponds, and flooded fields, roosting by day and foraging at night. It breeds along the Gulf Coast of Louisiana and Texas, in southern Florida, and in the Imperial Valley of southern California, south through the West Indies, Mexico, and Central America to Argentina. It is also resident in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. Birds regularly wander northward in North America, predominantly east of the Rockies and often in small parties. Washington&rsquo;s only confirmed record was of one bird shot from a flock of 10 at Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County) in October 1905. In September of that year five birds were shot from a flock of 11 at Port Alberni on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, providing what is still the province&rsquo;s only convincing record. Oregon, too, has a single well-documented record, of a flock of 11 birds at Coos Bay in February 1970.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								fulvous_whistling-duck				
162	41	Dendroica	caerulescens	Black-throated Blue Warbler		LC		Nesting in deciduous forest from western Ontario across the northern Great Lakes to the Maritime provinces, New England, and south along the Appalachians, the Black-throated Blue Warbler winters primarily in the West Indies. The adult male is unmistakable, with blue crown and back, white underparts, black face, throat, and flanks, and prominent white patch at the base of the primaries visible on the folded wing as well as in flight. Although much plainer the adult female is no less distinctive: overall grayish-brown, white eyebrow, gray cheek, and small white primary patch. Immatures resemble adult females but often show no white in the wing.

This is one of the more regular vagrant warblers in the West. It occurs annually in California and Oregon, mostly in fall, and is no longer on the review lists of those states. Idaho has about a dozen records, the great bulk of them in September and early October. British Columbia&#8217;s six records are all from the southern part of the province&#8212;again, mostly in fall. Washington has eight accepted records, five from the Westside and three east of the Cascades. Seven of these first appeared between late September and early December; the eighth was recorded in Olympia (Thurston County) in early March. One bird remained for the entire winter at a feeder in Mercer Island (King County), from 2 November 1994 to 5 April 1995.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								black-throated_blue_warbler				
163	41	Dendroica	castanea	Bay-breasted Warbler		LC		The Bay-breasted Warbler nests in boreal forests, usually with a spruce component, from southeastern Yukon across central Canada to the northern Great Lakes, New England, and Atlantic Canada. It winters from Costa Rica and Panama to Colombia and Venezuela, migrating for the most part across the Gulf of Mexico. Although it nests uncommonly in the lowlands of northeastern British Columbia, east of the Rocky Mountain crest, it is no more than a casual visitor in the rest of the province and the northwestern United States. Washington has three records: 27 June 2002 at Granite Falls (Snohomish County; not accepted by the state bird records committee), 21 September 2002 at Moses Lake (Grant County), and 5&#8211;7 June 2006 at Chehalis (Lewis County). Idaho has seven records, five from fall and two from spring, although none of these has yet been reviewed by the state bird records committee. Oregon&#8217;s eight accepted records&#8212;all of them from the central and eastern parts of the state&#8212;are concentrated in spring and summer, with only one in fall (September).

All plumages show greenish upperparts, streaked back, two prominent white wing bars, and unstreaked underparts. Breeding-plumaged adults are easy to identify, with bay crown, upper breast, and flanks; dark face; and buffy sides to the neck. Immatures and fall birds are among the most confusing of all warblers, even with good views. Separation from Blackpoll Warbler can be particularly troublesome. Consult advanced field guides for the subtler points.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								bay-breasted_warbler				
164	41	Dendroica	cerulea	Cerulean Warbler		VU				0								cerulean_warbler				
165	41	Dendroica	coronata	Yellow-rumped Warbler	Common summer resident. Uncommon winter.	LC	Among the most common warblers in North America, Yellow-rumped Warblers have generalized habitat requirements that help the population remain stable. Myrtle Yellow-rumped Warblers are expanding their range in parts of the northeastern United States. According to the Breeding Bird Survey, the population in Washington has increased (non-significantly) since 1966.	There are two subspecies of Yellow-rumped Warbler, both of which can be seen in Washington. The Audubon form breeds here and is present year round. The Myrtle form is here in migration and winter only. During spring migration and the breeding season, Audubon's Yellow-rumped Warblers are blue-gray streaked with black above, with broken white eye-rings and a yellow spot on their crowns. They have yellow rumps, although the wings can obscure this field mark, and yellow spots on the sides of their breasts, partially tucked under their wings. Audubon's Yellow-rumped Warblers also have yellow throats. Females in breeding plumage have two white wing-bars. Males have a significant amount of white between the wing-bars. Males also have blacker breasts and grayer backs, and are generally much more brightly marked than females. Adults in non-breeding plumage are much duller in color, more brown than gray. In flight, white outer tail corners are noticeable. Immature birds are dull brown with yellow on their rumps and sides, but lack yellow on their throats and heads. Myrtle Yellow-rumped Warblers are similar in appearance to Audubon's, with a few distinctions. Myrtles have white, rather than yellow, throats, and the males do not have white patches between their white wing-bars. Males in breeding plumage also have black masks with slight, white eye-lines above the masks and less black on the breasts. Juveniles look similar, although Myrtles have more extensive pale throats than do Audubon's.		1	Yellow-rumped Warblers use many types of habitat. They breed high up in conifers, often in small openings within dense, wet, coniferous forests. One notable exception to their breeding habitat is the San Juan Islands, where they nest in Pacific madrone. During migration, they can be found in a variety of habitats, although they can be found at higher elevations in the fall than in the spring. Their winter habitat requirements are also fairly general. They can be found in almost any habitat but are most common in open woods and brushy areas, including gardens, orchards, residential areas, and beaches.	The two subspecies of Yellow-rumped Warbler are present in varying numbers at different times of the year. The Audubon's form breeds in coniferous forests throughout the state. This form is most common in drier forests at higher elevations in eastern Washington, and in the northeast Olympics. Most Audubon's Yellow-rumped Warblers leave Washington in the winter, but they can be very common in winter in the Tri-Cities area (Richland, Pasco, Kennewick), and are uncommon in other lowlands throughout the state. The Myrtle form of Yellow-rumped Warbler is a common migrant and winter resident in Washington. There are no records of this Alaskan breeder nesting in Washington. The Myrtle form is most common in winter on the southern coast of Washington, from Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) southward.	In winter and migration, Yellow-rumped Warblers are found foraging in flocks with their own species. These flocks may be quite large. Yellow-rumped Warblers use a variety of foraging styles, including gleaning prey from twigs, leaves, and occasionally tree trunks, foraging on the ground, and flying out to retrieve prey in midair. During the breeding season, males generally forage higher than females. The chip notes of the races sound different, with the Myrtle having a sharper note.	Insects are the main diet of Yellow-rumped Warblers during the breeding season, although they rely heavily on berries when insects are not available. Their ability to digest the wax on wax myrtle and other berries is unique among the warblers and allows them to winter farther north than most other members of the family.	Common throughout all Kittitas County forest zones up to subalpine. In Kitsap, Island, and eastern King Counties, widespread and locally fairly common in relatively undisturbed older conifer forests. Absent from King County lowlands, with two outlying records probably representing migrants or dispersing failed breeders. Predicted occurrence on Vashon Island by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) not supported by BBA survey results. Although <i>D.c. auduboni</i> (Audubon's Warbler) and <i>D.c. coronata</i> (Myrtle Warbler) both common migrants in Washington, only former breeds here.	Males arrive on the breeding grounds a few days before the females. Monogamous pairs form shortly after the females arrive. The female builds the nest, usually on a horizontal conifer branch or fork, although broadleaved trees and shrubs are also used. The nest is a small, flat cup of twigs, grass, moss, and rootlets, lined with plant down and feathers that curve over the rim of the nest, partially covering the eggs. The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 12 to 13 days. The male feeds the female at the nest, and occasionally helps incubate. Both members of the pair feed the young, which leave the nest 10 to 14 days after hatching. They can make short flights within a few days of leaving the nest. Once the young fledge, the female often starts a second brood, while the male continues to feed the first brood for up to two weeks.	Yellow-rumped Warblers are short- to medium-distance migrants. They are one of the last warblers to leave their breeding grounds in the fall, and one of the first to return in the spring. In the fall, large waves of migrants leave the Cascades and more northerly habitats and arrive in the eastern Washington lowlands. In winter, flocks may wander in search of food sources.	yellow-rumped_warbler	YRWA			
166	41	Dendroica	discolor	Prairie Warbler		LC		Adults have a brownish-green back with chestnut streaks, bright yellow underparts, black streaking on the sides, faint wingbars, a yellow eyebrow and dark line through the eye, and a yellow cheek patch. Immatures are much plainer; consult field guides for separating them from similar plumages of other <I>Dendroica</I> warblers. Among Washington&#8217;s regularly occurring warblers, Prairie Warbler could be mistaken for Townsend&#8217;s Warbler in some plumages. However, unlike Townsend&#8217;s it typically forages in brush and low branches rather than high in the canopy, and bobs its tail constantly.

The Prairie Warbler nests east of the Great Plains from southern New England and the lower Midwest to the Gulf Coast, and winters in southern Florida and the West Indies. It is an accidental fall vagrant in the Pacific Northwest, almost exclusively along the coast. Oregon has nine records, British Columbia has three, and Idaho has none. Washington&#8217;s only record, at Wallula (Walla Walla County) on 20 December 1989, is unusual but not unparalleled both for its location and for its date. The Northwest has two other winter records&#8212;a bird at Newport, Oregon, 6&#8211;26 December 1995, and another 18 December 1993&#8211;25 January 1994 at Masset in the Queen Charlotte Islands, British Columbia. The only other records from the interior Northwest were at Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, Oregon, on 10 September 1999, and a sight record from 17 June 1977 in the Okanagan Valley of British Columbia. The latter is also the only spring record of Prairie Warbler for the Northwest.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								prairie_warbler				
167	41	Dendroica	dominica	Yellow-throated Warbler		NT		Long-billed and slender-appearing, the Yellow-throated Warbler commonly forages by moving methodically along branches. All plumages are similar and identification is straightforward. Upperparts are blue-gray, wings blue-gray with two white wingbars. Throat and upper breast are bright yellow, separated from the upperparts by a black border. The rest of the underparts are white with black streaking on the breast sides and flanks. The head has a long white eyebrow, a black eyeline and ear patch, and a white crescent below the eye. A large white spot on the side of the neck is a key field mark.

The Yellow-throated Warbler nests in lowland forest habitats of the Southeast, lower Midwest, and Middle Atlantic states, and winters in the West Indies, Mexico, and Central America as well as in Florida and along the coast of Georgia and South Carolina. It is one of the less common vagrant &#8220;eastern&#8221; warblers in the West. British Columbia has a single record, Washington and Idaho each have two, and Oregon has five. Six of these occurred at scattered dates between 24 April and 1 November, while the other four represent long-staying winter birds at feeders: Harrison, Idaho, November 1995&#8211;January 1996; Gulf Islands, British Columbia, January 1998; Twisp (Okanogan County), Washington, December 2001&#8211;January 2002; and Seaside, Oregon, January&#8211;February 2005. Washington&#8217;s second record was in rural Asotin County in October 2003.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								yellow-throated_warbler				
168	41	Dendroica	fusca	Blackburnian Warbler		LC		The adult male Blackburnian Warbler in breeding plumage is instantly recognizable by the bright red-orange of the throat, upper breast, and face, where it surrounds a dark triangular ear patch. The coloration quickly fades into the white lower breast. Otherwise the bird is mostly black-and-white: sides strongly streaked black, large white wing patch, dark back with white streaks. Adult females and non-breeding males are similar in general pattern but less boldly marked and with a more subdued, yellow-orange coloration. First-fall females, the dullest of all, are gray and yellow in appearance, but even then the facial pattern and broad, pale-yellow eyebrow are good identification clues.

Closely tied to boreal hemlock forests, this songbird breeds from eastern Alberta to Atlantic Canada, the upper Midwest, New England, and south in the eastern mountains to the Carolinas. Its migration route takes it across the Gulf of Mexico in direct flight to and from winter grounds in the humid conifer forests of South America. It is a casual vagrant in the Northwest. Washington has four accepted records&#8212;two from the Eastside in spring and two in fall from west of the Cascades. British Columbia&#8217;s six records occurred from 5 June to 29 August. Idaho has about five records, mostly in fall. Oregon also has five records, two in fall and three in spring, all but one of them from east of the Cascades.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								blackburnian_warbler				
169	41	Dendroica	magnolia	Magnolia Warbler		LC		The Magnolia Warbler breeds in moist coniferous and mixed forest from Yukon and British Columbia to Newfoundland and the Maritimes, mostly in Canada but also in the upper Midwest, New England, and the Appalachians. It migrates east of the Great Plains, crossing the Gulf of Mexico to and from its wintering grounds in southeastern Mexico and Central America, but is also one of the more common vagrant &#8220;eastern&#8221; warblers seen in the western United States. Oregon and Idaho both have more than 20 records. Washington has 12 accepted records, seven east of the Cascades and five from westside coastal lowlands. Nine are from fall (September&#8211;October), while two occurred in late May at Ione (Pend Oreille County) and near Dixie (Walla Walla County). The other record was of a male singing on territory near Twisp (Okanogan County) for nearly a month, 8 June&#8211;4 July 1996.

In fall, when it is most likely to be seen in Washington, this species has greenish upperparts, a gray head with a prominent white eye-ring, two white wingbars, yellow underparts from chin to belly, streaked sides (sometimes weakly), and white undertail coverts. Key field marks are the yellow rump, white underside of the front half of the tail, and wide white band visible on the spread tail. There is considerable variation in plumage by age, sex, and season. In particular, breeding birds are much more strongly patterned: consult a good field guide for details.

<I>Revised October 2007<I/>		1								magnolia_warbler				
170	41	Dendroica	nigrescens	Black-throated Gray Warbler	Fairly common summer resident, mostly west.	LC	The population of Black-throated Gray Warblers appears stable. Breeding Bird Survey data indicate some decline in Washington, although it is not significant. They are parasitized by Brown-headed Cowbirds, but the rates of parasitism seem relatively low. Settlement and forest management in western Washington may have benefited Black-throated Gray Warblers, because this development has increased the amount of hardwood growing in these historically coniferous zones. More study is needed on the status of the Black-throated Gray Warbler population range-wide and in Washington.	The Black-throated Gray Warbler is a small bird with a gray back and white to off-white undersides with black streaks. It has two white wing-bars and alternating black and white stripes on its head. The male has a black throat, and the female and juvenile have gray or whitish throats. Both sexes have a small, yellow spot in front of each eye, although this marking is very difficult to see in the field.		1	Throughout most of their range, Black-throated Gray Warblers inhabit a variety of deciduous or mixed deciduous-coniferous woodlands, often with oak present. In Washington, which does not have a significant amount of oak, they are more generalized. They do breed in the remaining oak groves in southwestern Washington, but they also use mixed and coniferous forests, where they are often found in second-growth and edge areas.	These common, summer visitors are found throughout western Washington from mid-April to mid-September, with smaller numbers remaining through September. They are also abundant in the Garry oak habitat in Klickitat County. They are relatively rare in eastern Washington, but can be found locally in a few spots in Kittitas and Yakima Counties.	Black-throated Gray Warblers associate with mixed feeding flocks, especially during migration. They spend much of their time in the treetops, although when they are found lower down, they are not extremely wary and can be observed closely. They use a variety of foraging styles; most commonly they glean food from foliage while they climb about on tree limbs.	Black-throated Gray Warblers eat insects, especially small caterpillars.	Fairly common in hardwood-dominated forests throughout King and Kitsap Counties at low and moderate elevations, preferring sites with mature trees such as maples, alders, and oaks. Uncommon and local in Island County except for forested north tip of Whidbey Island; other county records at possible level may represent migrants or dispersing birds, as this warbler begins moving in July. Fairly common locally in west-central Kittitas County along Cle Elum River north to Salmon la Sac. Population decline in urban core appears to be worsening since close of atlas period.	Much of the breeding biology of Black-throated Gray Warblers is unknown. They are most likely monogamous, and nests are typically situated on horizontal branches from 7 to 35 feet off the ground. Nests are open cups made of weeds, grass, plant fibers, and moss, with a lining of fur and feathers. The female builds the nest and incubates 4 eggs, although the incubation period is not known. Once the young hatch, both sexes feed them. It is not known when the young fledge, or for how long the parents feed them. In some areas, as soon as the young can fly and find their own food, they leave the breeding grounds for higher elevations.	Most Black-throated Gray Warblers winter in Mexico, although some remain in southern California.	black-throated_gray_warbler	BTYW			
171	41	Dendroica	occidentalis	Hermit Warbler	Uncommon to locally fairly common summer resident.	LC	Hermit Warblers formerly bred as far north as British Columbia. However as Townsend's Warblers expand their range, Hermit Warblers are being supplanted, that is, they are slowly being extirpated. The northernmost edge of their current range is a zone of hybridization between Hermit and Townsend's Warblers. Hermit Warblers require specialized habitat, and that habitat (mature coniferous forest) is at risk from logging within their range. Hermit Warblers will use forests that have been lightly thinned, but will not inhabit heavily thinned or clear-cut stands. They have a relatively small range that is decreasing due to logging and the expansion of Townsend's Warblers. Although still common in many areas, Hermit Warblers are listed as a species-at-risk by Partners in Flight.	Hermit Warblers are small, yellow-headed birds with distinctive, unstreaked flanks. They are white below and gray above, with white outer tail feathers and two white wing-bars. Males have black throats. Females' throats are grayish, with some black. In parts of Washington, Hermit Warblers hybridize with Townsend's Warblers, resulting in birds with plumage intermediate between the two species.		1	Hermit Warblers are most often found in mature coniferous forests, from sea level to the mountains. During breeding season, they are most common in stands over 30 years old, and are generally absent from stands under 20 years old. They are generally found in the interior of large forests, high in the canopy.	Hermit Warblers are common from mid-April to early August in the southern Cascades and southeastern Olympic Mountains. Pure Hermit Warblers are found in southern Washington, from Mount Adams and Mount Rainier west, north to the southern Olympic Peninsula. Hybrid zones are approximately 50-mile-wide bands in the southern Cascades and the Olympic Peninsula. Within the hybrid zone in the Olympic Mountains, Hermit Warblers can be found at mid-elevations between higher- and lower-elevation Townsend's Warblers.	During migration and post-breeding, Hermit Warblers are commonly found in mixed flocks. When foraging they hop about the foliage, moving from the trunk outward to branch tips and then starting back at the trunk. They also glean items from the foliage while hovering, and will fly out to catch aerial prey. Hermit Warblers can hang upside-down to glean from the undersides of leaves and twigs. Their preference for high, dense foliage makes them difficult to spot, but they can be heard singing regularly during the breeding season.	Insects, spiders, and other invertebrates make up most of the Hermit Warbler's diet. Young birds are fed many caterpillars.	Core Washington breeding range lies west and south of our four-county area, with closest approach across Hood Canal on east flanks of Olympics. Regularly hybridizes with Townsend's Warbler where breeding ranges meet. Scattered possible records from King and southern Kittitas Counties represent spring overshoots or remnant breeders whose parental pedigree may be suspect, due to difficulty of identifying some hybrid forms. BBA teams did record many certain hybrids (not mapped). Some Kitsap County records near Green Mountain from first atlas phase may represent pure Hermit Warblers, although systematic searches during second phase and beyond have turned up only hybrids.	Males arrive on the breeding grounds before females. They establish and defend territories by singing. Monogamous pairs form shortly after the females arrive. The female builds the nest, which is saddled across high limbs and concealed by overhanging branches. The nest is an open cup of weeds, needles, twigs, moss, rootlets, and spider webbing, lined with feathers, hair, and other soft material. The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for about 12 days, and both parents feed the young. The young leave the nest 8 to 10 days after hatching, and the parents continue to feed them for at least a few days following fledging.	Most Hermit Warblers winter in the mountains of Mexico and Guatemala, although some winter on the California coast and north to Oregon in small numbers. In spring, they return along the coast in a fairly quick northward migration. Fall migration is generally through the mountains and is usually more drawn out than the spring movement.	hermit_warbler	HEWA			
172	41	Dendroica	palmarum	Palm Warbler	Rare winter west. Casual migrant east.	LC	Numbers appear to be stable. There are currently no major threats to Palm Warblers' habitats as most of their breeding range is remote, and they often winter in open and disturbed areas. They are fairly common within their normal range.	Palm Warblers are mostly brownish birds, with distinctive, yellow undertail coverts. They have small white corners on their tails that are visible in flight. Eastern birds are bright yellow below with rufous streaks on their breasts; western birds are lightly streaked and drabber in color. They have a dark eye-line through each eye. Adults in breeding plumage have rufous crowns and yellow throats.		1	Palm Warblers breed on the edges of boreal-forest bogs. During migration, when they are seen in Washington, they are usually found in hedgerows, thickets, and other edge habitats along the coast, often frequenting thickets of non-native Scots broom.	Palm Warblers are rare visitors in western Washington, mostly during the fall, where they are uncommon on the outer coast, especially near Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County). They are considerably more rare in Puget Sound, although one Palm Warbler wintered at the Union Bay Natural Area in Seattle (King County) in 2001.	Outside of the breeding season, especially during migration, Palm Warblers may join mixed flocks. They are usually found fairly low, in the understory or on the ground. The almost constantly bobbing tail is an excellent field mark.	Palm Warblers eat mostly insects and also some berries.		Monogamous pairs typically nest on or near the ground. Nests off the ground are often located close to the trunk of small spruces. The female builds an open cup of grass and bark, and lines it with feathers. The nest is usually concealed by a clump of grass or sphagnum moss hummock. Both members of a pair may help incubate 4 to 5 eggs for about 12 days. They both feed the young. The young typically fledge at about 12 days and can fly short distances within a few days of fledging. Pairs generally raise two broods each year.	Palm Warblers migrate from their breeding grounds in northern Canada to their wintering grounds in the southeastern United States. It is during fall migration and early winter that they are most likely to be found in Washington.	palm_warbler				
173	41	Dendroica	pensylvanica	Chestnut-sided Warbler		LC		Breeding adults have a yellowish crown, black eye line and mustache mark, dark wings with two pale-yellow wing-bars, chestnut on the sides, white underparts, and a streaked back. Immature (first-fall) birds are much plainer, with a greenish crown and back, gray underparts, and a prominent white eye-ring. Fall adults are similar to immatures but usually show some chestnut on the sides.

Chestnut-sided Warblers nest in forests from eastern Alberta across southern Canada to Nova Scotia, the upper Midwest and northeastern U.S., and southward along the Appalachian spine. They winter in southern Mexico and Central America, migrating mostly east of the Great Plains and in direct flight across the Gulf of Mexico. However, this is one of the commoner &#8220;eastern&#8221; warblers encountered in the West. British Columbia has many records from all regions of the province, including confirmed breeding. Idaho has about 30 records equally divided between spring and fall. The species occurs just about annually in Oregon, with spring records outnumbering fall records by about 3:1. Washington shows a similar early-season bias, with 14 of 17 accepted records in June and the first half of July and the remaining three from late August to October. Twelve of these records are from east of the Cascade crest and five are from the westside lowlands.

<I>Revised October 2007<I/>		1								chestnut-sided_warbler				
174	41	Dendroica	petechia	Yellow Warbler	Common summer resident.	LC	Yellow Warblers are one of the most common and widely distributed warblers in North America. They are a common host for the nest parasite, the Brown-headed Cowbird. However, Yellow Warblers may respond aggressively to cowbirds near their nests, and will sometimes build new nests over nests with cowbird eggs. Cowbirds can have adverse effects on localized Yellow Warbler populations, although it is not likely that cowbirds have a significant impact on the population as a whole at this time. Yellow Warblers' use of edge and second-growth habitat enables them to survive in logged and developed areas. In Washington, livestock grazing along willow-lined rivers damages habitat, and Yellow Warblers have declined along some rivers and creeks in the Columbia Basin. According to the Breeding Bird Survey, the Washington population declined significantly from 1966 to 1979, but has rebounded since then, with a statewide, non-significant increase since 1980.	Yellow Warblers are bright yellow birds. Their upperparts have a slight greenish tinge, and their tails are greenish yellow. Their heads and faces are plain, without lines or streaks. Males have reddish streaks down their breasts and bellies. Females are also yellow, but not as bright as males, and they lack red streaks. Females and immatures show a fine, yellowish eye-ring. First-year birds are drab yellow-gray, with yellow undertail coverts.		1	Throughout their range, Yellow Warblers use a variety of brushy habitats on forest edges. In Washington, their breeding habitat is restricted to hardwood thickets near water, especially those with willow, alder, and cottonwood. They use similar habitat during migration, but can be found in more varied habitats also. In winter, they can be found in semi-open tropical habitats and are often associated with mangroves.	Yellow Warblers breed all over Washington in appropriate habitat, but are most common in streamside thickets in the eastern Washington lowlands. They breed in western Washington as well, where appropriate habitat remains, but are less common in the western Olympic Peninsula, as there is not much deciduous habitat in that part of the state. Yellow Warblers are common in Washington from May through mid-August. They are sighted uncommonly through the end of September.	Yellow Warblers forage at various levels in the vegetation, although males generally forage higher than females. They glean prey from small limbs and foliage, but also fly out to catch prey in midair. They can be difficult to see because they generally inhabit dense vegetation, but during the breeding season, the males' distinctive song is a helpful way to locate them.	Insects, especially caterpillars, make up the Yellow Warbler's diet.	Widespread, common breeder, primarily in riparian habitats with hardwood trees. Recorded from coastline to mountain passes. High density of records at moderate elevation along Yakima River drainage in dry-forest zones of Kittitas County. Nearly absent from steppe zone to Columbia River, and possibly declining on Columbia Plateau (Smith et al. 1997). Greater share of records from urban core may represent late migrants and dispersal of failed breeders, since species still on move into early June and again by mid-July.	Yellow Warblers are primarily monogamous and form pair bonds soon after females arrive on the breeding grounds (about ten days behind males). The female builds the nest, often in an upright fork in a tree or shrub. The nest is made of bark and grass, and lined with plant down and hair. The male brings food to the female while she incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 11 to 12 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest 8 to 10 days after hatching. The parents continue to feed the young for up to three weeks after they leave the nest.	Long-distance migrants, Yellow Warblers leave their breeding grounds in midsummer to winter in southern Mexico and Central America.	yellow_warbler	YEWA			
175	41	Dendroica	striata	Blackpoll Warbler		LC		Solid black cap, white cheek, and black-streaked back and underparts make the breeding-plumaged male unmistakable. In all other plumages, however, the Blackpoll Warbler is much plainer and subject to confusion with similar plumages of other warblers of the genus <I>Dendroica</I> that show two white wing bars and an overall yellowish or greenish coloration, with or without some streaking on the sides. The white undertail coverts are a useful mark; consult field guides for other identification clues.

The Blackpoll Warbler nests in taiga and boreal forests from Alaska across northern Canada to Labrador, south on mountaintops into New England and upstate New York. Its spring and fall migration routes take it across the Caribbean to and from wintering grounds in South America, some birds traveling as far south as Argentina. This is perhaps the most common vagrant &#8220;eastern&#8221; warbler in the West. California records a hundred or more Blackpoll visitors in a typical year but they are much less common farther north. In the Pacific Northwest, Blackpoll Warbler breeds in the northern part of British Columbia but occurs only casually in the southern part of the province and along the coast. This species is a casual, nearly annual visitor in Washington with about 20 records, all but two of which occurred in fall and all but two east of the Cascades. It is rare but annual in both Idaho and Oregon, with 75&#8211;80 percent of the records from fall and the rest in spring.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								blackpoll_warbler				
176	41	Dendroica	tigrina	Cape May Warbler		LC		The adult male in breeding plumage is brightly and distinctively patterned, with olive back, yellow rump, strongly streaked yellow breast, bold white wing patch, and yellow neck and face with chestnut around and behind the eye. Other plumages are duller; consult a field guide for the fine points of separating these from similar plumages of some of the other <I>Dendroica</I> warblers.

The Cape May Warbler breeds in the boreal forests of Canada as well as in northernmost New England and the upper Midwest, and winters in the West Indies and along the Caribbean coast south to Honduras. Although it nests as far west as southeastern Yukon and northeastern British Columbia its migration route lies almost entirely east of the Mississippi River Valley. Cape May Warbler is accidental in British Columbia away from its nesting grounds. Washington&#8217;s two accepted records were in September 1974 at Bellingham (Whatcom County) and February 2005 in Spokane (Spokane County). Idaho also has two records, in September and January. Oregon has 10 records, about evenly divided between spring and fall; three are from along the coast and the others from east of the Cascades. 

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								cape_may_warbler				
177	41	Dendroica	townsendi	Townsend's Warbler	Common summer resident. Uncommon winter west.	LC	Townsend's Warblers are at risk from habitat loss on both their breeding and wintering grounds. The mid-elevation conifer habitat where they breed has suffered extensive deforestation in Washington during the past sixty years. Townsend's Warblers have also been identified as highly susceptible to alteration of tropical forest habitats. Thus although the Breeding Bird Survey shows a small, not statistically significant increase in population between 1966 and 2002, care must be taken to protect both northern breeding and tropical wintering habitats. Townsend's Warblers have expanded their range southward in Washington, and as a result now hybridize with Hermit Warblers. For more on the hybrid zone, see Hermit Warbler.	Townsend's Warblers are distinctive warblers with conspicuous patterns of high contrast. They have greenish backs and gray wings, with two white wing-bars on each wing. Males have alternating black and yellow stripes on their heads. The black stripes across the eyes have yellow spots directly under the eyes. They have black throats and yellow breasts with black streaks on the sides. Their white outer tail feathers are conspicuous in flight. Females look similar to males, but have light throats and olive, rather than black, stripes on their heads. Juveniles look similar to adult females. In parts of Washington, Townsend's Warblers hybridize with Hermit Warblers, resulting in birds with plumage intermediate between the two species.		1	Townsend's Warblers are primarily birds of coniferous forests, especially mature, dense stands of at least 20 acres. They are more common in the mountains, but also breed in some lowland areas. During winter, they can be found in deciduous forests as well.	From May through September, Townsend's Warblers are common in appropriate habitat in western Washington and at higher elevations throughout the state, although they are uncommon on the Olympic Peninsula. Townsend's Warblers winter uncommonly in western Washington lowlands. Townsend's Warbler'Hermit Warbler hybrids are common around Mount Adams and Mount St. Helens and the east slopes of the Olympic Mountains.	Outside of the breeding season, Townsend's Warblers can often be found in mixed flocks with chickadees, kinglets, and other warblers, or rarely in single-species flocks of Townsend's Warblers. Although they usually forage high up in trees, Townsend's Warblers may be lured closer by an imitation of a Pygmy Owl. They forage by gleaning items from foliage, usually by climbing about, but sometimes while hovering. They also occasionally fly out to catch aerial prey.	Townsend's Warblers eat primarily insects, although berries and some nectar round out the winter diet.	Common in conifer forests at moderate and high elevations in Kittitas and eastern King Counties. Fairly common at mid-elevation sites in Kitsap County, uncommon at low elevations there and in Island County. Prefers older forest stands dominated by Douglas-fir. East of Cascade crest, found in all forest zones up to subalpine, but more common above ponderosa pine belt. Except for forested north tip of Whidbey Island, lowland Puget Trough records almost certainly represent non-breeders. Regularly interbreeds with Hermit Warbler in southwestern Kitsap County, where many hybrids recorded.	Males typically arrive on the breeding grounds first and defend their territories by singing. Monogamous pairs form shortly after the females arrive. The female builds the nest on a conifer branch, toward the end of the branch. The nest is typically high up in the canopy, and is well concealed by foliage. It is a bulky cup made of grass, moss, bark strips, and twigs, lined with hair, feathers, and moss. The female incubates 3 to 5 eggs for 11 to 14 days. Both the male and the female feed the young, which leave the nest about 10 days after hatching.	Washington's breeding Townsend's Warblers leave in late summer or early fall and spend the winter in the highlands of southern Mexico and Central America. Coastal British Columbia breeders make shorter journeys to California, Oregon, or the Washington coast. Both spring and fall migrations are spread over an extended time period, and spring arrivals are fairly late.	townsends_warbler	TOWA			
178	41	Dendroica	virens	Black-throated Green Warbler		LC		In Washington, the Black-throated Green Warbler is likely to be confused only with Townsend&#8217;s Warbler, its western counterpart. The most obvious differences are the Black-throated Green&#8217;s greener back, less contrasting light-olive facial &#8220;mask,&#8221; and absence or near-absence of yellow on the breast. It is an accidental visitor in Washington, with just three accepted records in June, July, and November, all from east of the Cascades. It breeds in northeastern British Columbia but is only a casual visitor elsewhere in the province. Idaho&#8217;s single record is from May 2001. Oregon has ten accepted records, and Black-throated Green Warbler occurs annually in very low numbers in California. Its breeding range extends across Canada from the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains in northern Alberta and British Columbia to Labrador and the midwestern and eastern United States, south to Alabama and the Carolinas. It winters in Mexico, Central America, the West Indies, and locally in southern Florida and along the Gulf Coast of the United States.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								black-throated_green_warbler				
179	30	Dolichonyx	oryzivorus	Bobolink	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	Bobolinks are common throughout most of their range and were formerly considered to be major predators of rice in the southeastern United States. There is less rice grown in the United States now, and the population of Bobolinks has declined in the past few decades due to loss of habitat, so their predation of rice is less of an issue. Partners in Flight lists them as a species-at-risk. Bobolinks are historically more eastern birds and have expanded their range into Washington because of the habitat created by agriculture. In fact, the Toppenish colony near Yakima is probably the westernmost Bobolink colony in North America. Mowing and livestock grazing are both threats to breeding Bobolinks. Preservation of some uncultivated, wet meadow adjacent to hay fields, along with delayed mowing by farmers until the young have fledged, may help maintain Bobolink populations.	Male Bobolinks in breeding plumage are visually striking birds. Their plumage has been described as looking like a skunk, a backward tuxedo, or a broken egg running down their back. They are solid black below, with black faces, light yellow napes, black and white streaked backs, and white rumps. Females are buff-brown with streaked backs and plain buff underparts. They have plain faces, dark eye-lines, and dark and light head stripes. They could easily be misidentified as a large sparrow, especially because they have thick, short bills and are smaller than most blackbirds. Males in non-breeding plumage look like females.		1	Bobolinks are generally found in tall-grass prairies, hay fields, and similar open areas. They do not occur in short-grass prairies. In Washington, which has little natural tall-grass prairie habitat, Bobolinks are associated with irrigated hay fields and other agricultural crops that are similar in structure to tall-grass prairies. During migration they can be found in freshwater marshes, especially rice fields, and at coastal areas.	Bobolinks are rare visitors to western Washington during migration, but are primarily birds of eastern Washington. They are present from late May to mid-August and are fairly common in the northeastern corner of the state, primarily in Okanogan (east of the Okanogan River), Ferry, Stevens, and Pend Oreille Counties. A reliable place to find Bobolinks has been Aeneas Valley in Okanogan County. They also breed at Toppenish National Wildlife Refuge near Yakima, which is the only known breeding colony outside of these counties.	Bobolinks are social throughout most of the year. They sit on high perches in meadows, but forage while walking on the ground. They are very apparent in flight with their dark underparts, and they perform conspicuous flight songs and displays. Their song is a bubbly, metallic series of beeps and twitters.	Bobolinks are primarily seedeaters. They feed heavily on rice, weed seeds, and other grains during the fall and winter. During the breeding season they also eat insects and other invertebrates.		Bobolinks are strongly polygamous and nest in small, loose colonies. The female builds a loosely woven nest on the ground in dense, high grass. She plucks away vegetation to create an open spot on the ground and makes a slight depression for the nest. The nest has an exterior wall of leaves and grass with a lining of finer grasses. The female incubates 3 to 7 eggs for 11 to 13 days. The male helps brood and feed the young of his primary mate. Secondary females typically brood and feed their young alone, but sometimes have help from the males. The young leave the nest 10 to 11 days after hatching and can make sustained flights by 16 days.	Long-distance migrants, Bobolinks winter in southern South America. They migrate in flocks that appear to be sexually segregated in the spring but mixed in the fall. Magnetic cues, which help many bird species migrate, appear to be particularly important to Bobolinks.	bobolink				
180	47	Dryocopus	pileatus	Pileated Woodpecker	Fairly common resident west. Uncommon east.	LC	Pileated Woodpeckers play an important role within their ecosystems by excavating nesting and roosting cavities that are subsequently used by many other birds and by many small mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and invertebrates.  Shooting for sport and food was formerly a significant source of mortality.  Although shooting Pileated Woodpeckers is now illegal, the practice may continue in some places but probably not enough to significantly affect the population.  Clear-cutting of old-growth and other forests currently has the most significant impact on Pileated Woodpecker habitat, but Pileated Woodpeckers are fairly adaptable, which offsets some of the impact from habitat loss.  They are, however, currently candidates for endangered species listing by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and are included on the Gap Analysis list of species-at-risk.	Pileated Woodpeckers are the largest woodpeckers in North America (with the exception of the Ivory-billed Woodpecker, which probably no longer lives within the borders of the United States).  They are crow-sized and black, with bright red pointed crests, the red more extensive on the crests of males. A broad white stripe on each side of their faces below their eyes continues down along each side of their necks.  Males have red moustachial stripes, females black. White underwing linings and some white at the wrist above are visible when the bird flies.		1	Any forest type (broadleaved, coniferous, or mixed) can sustain Pileated Woodpeckers as long as there are trees large enough for roosting and nesting.  Pileated Woodpeckers are often associated with mature and old-growth forests but can breed in younger forests if they contain some large trees.  In western Washington, they typically roost in western hemlock and western red cedar.	Pileated Woodpeckers are uncommon residents in appropriate habitats at low to mid-elevations throughout the state.  They are more common in western than in eastern Washington.  They can be found even in city parks where large trees are present, and they breed in Seward Park, Discovery Park, and Camp Long (all in Seattle, King County).	These powerful woodpeckers chip out characteristic oval or rectangular excavations in the trees in which they forage.  Their drumming can be heard for long distances, as can their loud 'laughing' call.  They roost in hollow trees with multiple entrance holes.	Pileated Woodpeckers eat wood-boring insects and insects that nest in trees, including long-horned beetles and especially carpenter ants.  They eat some fruits and nuts as well.	Fairly common in coniferous, hardwood, and mixed-forest habitats of Island, Kitsap, and King Counties, becoming much less common at higher elevations of Cascades. Locally fairly common in forested habitats of western Kittitas County. Predicted range eastward from Blewett Pass to Colockum Pass mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) not supported by BBA records.	Long-term monogamous pairs stay together on territories year round.  Both members of the pair excavate a new nest cavity in a dead tree or branch every year.  The excavation can take the pair up to six weeks to complete.  The nest is lined only with woodchips from the excavation.  Both sexes typically incubate the 3 to 5 eggs (usually 4) for about 18 days and brood the young for the first 7 to 10 days after they hatch.   Both regurgitate food for the young, which leave the nest after 24 to 28 days but may stay with the parents for another 2 to 3 months while they learn to forage.	Although generally resident, Pileated Woodpeckers sometimes wander from their breeding areas and many move down-slope or into streamside forests or suburban areas in winter.	pileated_woodpecker	PIWO			
181	33	Dumetella	carolinensis	Gray Catbird	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	While the Breeding Bird Survey has recorded a significant population increase in Washington since 1966, the Washington Gap Analysis Project lists the Gray Catbird as a species-at-risk.  Its preference for early-successional habitat helps this species to do well in an increasingly human-altered landscape, as road construction, utility-line placement, and development all create habitat.  Intensive agriculture, however, reduces shelterbelts that used to provide prime Gray Catbird habitat, and rapid development along coastal wintering grounds has destroyed former habitat also.	Gray Catbirds are medium-sized, slate-gray birds with black caps and tails, and chestnut undertail coverts.  Males, females, and juveniles look similar. Gray Catbirds hold their tails cocked up.		1	In all seasons, Gray Catbirds inhabit dense undergrowth dominated by saplings and shrubs.  In Washington, they are found most often along streams, where thick, low growth is common, but they can also be found away from water at edges and in other thicketed areas.  Thickets of poplar, red-osier dogwood, wild rose, and willow are all commonly inhabited by Gray Catbirds.	Gray Catbirds are an east-side species.  They are most common in major river valleys of far-northeastern Washington, but are present up to the eastern slopes of the Cascades.  Gray Catbirds are typically present in Washington from mid-May through early September, but lingering birds have been seen extremely rarely in winter. They can be found in selected thickets along the Yakima River and in tributaries along the Columbia in Kittitas and Yakima Counties.	Gray Catbirds often forage on the ground, flipping leaves aside with their bills.  When they forage in the shrub layer, they glean food from foliage and twigs.  They sing a discordant series of sounds that can be alternately tuneful and rasping.  They are named for their mewing call and are receptive to pishing.	Gray Catbirds have a varied diet, but primarily eat insects and other small invertebrates during breeding season, and berries and other fruit the rest of the year.  They probably eat more vegetable than animal matter over the course of a year.	Fairly common, but local, in dense, shrubby riparian vegetation along Yakima River and tributaries on lower east slope of Cascades, from west edge of Kittitas Valley to about Easton. BBA records offer no support for predicted range mapped along other Kittitas County streams by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Rare records (none mapped here) in our four-county area at higher and lower elevations outside this core breeding zone may represent migrants, as catbirds on move well into early June.	Gray Catbirds are monogamous and form pairs shortly after they arrive on the breeding grounds.  They nest in dense, broad-leaved thickets and tangles, or low trees.  The female builds the nest, perhaps with material brought by the male.  The nest is a large, bulky, open cup, typically supported by horizontal branches and made from twigs, weeds, grass, leaves, and bark strips. It is fashioned into three layers ranging from a coarse outer layer to a fine inner layer.  The female incubates 3-4 eggs for 12-14 days.  Both parents help brood and feed the young, which leave the nest at 8-12 days.  The adults continue to feed the fledglings for up to 12 days after they leave the nest.  Gray Catbirds often raise two broods a year, and build a new nest for each brood.	Gray Catbirds are Neotropical migrants that winter in the southeastern US, Mexico, and Central America.  Like many other species whose population is centered east of the Rocky Mountains, Gray Catbirds appear to migrate east first and then south, east of the Rockies.	gray_catbird				
182	8	Egretta	caerulea	Little Blue Heron		LC		Two records of immatures in Puget lowlands in October; one stayed into January. An adult was seen near Ellensburg (Kittitas County) in June 2002.		1								little_blue_heron				
183	8	Egretta	thula	Snowy Egret		LC		Rare but regular visitor to eastern and western Washington, now seen annually. Most occur in spring (peak May).		1								snowy_egret				
184	1	Elanus	leucurus	White-tailed Kite	Uncommon resident in southwest.	LC	During the early 20th Century, the White-tailed Kite had a very restricted range and was threatened with extinction. The population has been growing and expanding its range since then, and has now spread from Texas and California to Oregon, Washington, and other spots throughout the United States. This range expansion is irruptive; they settle in large areas in short periods of time, and seem to follow vole population cycles. There is a sizeable population near the southern coast of Oregon, and birds continue to become more common in Washington. The first known breeding record in Washington is at the Raymond Airport (Pacific County) in 1988.	The White-tailed Kite was formerly known as the Black-shouldered Kite, until the species was split, with the North American birds taking the new moniker. The White-tailed Kite is a distinctive bird, especially when hovering over open fields. The kite's upperparts are mostly gray, with bold black shoulders. Its tail is white above and below, with a small stripe of light gray down the center of the upper side of the tail. From below, the kite's body appears to be white, with black patches at the wrists and gray-black primaries. Its head is mostly white with red eyes. Juveniles are similar, but have a buffy wash over much of their bodies. The kite's wings are long and pointed, often held in a dihedral during soaring.		1	White-tailed Kites are found in open grasslands with scattered trees for nesting and perching. They are often found along tree-lined river valleys with adjacent open areas, but are not usually found in forests or in clearcuts within forests.	This rare breeder is found year round in wet meadows and tree-lined stream corridors in southwestern Washington, and increasingly farther north in western Washington. In Washington, they are found in higher densities during winter, and thus, seemingly disperse from southern breeding areas. They have nested along the Willapa River and in the Chinook Valley (both Pacific County), by Hanaford Creek and the Chehalis River (both Lewis County). In Wahkiakum County, they have nested along the Skamokawa, Naselle, Deep, and Grays Rivers. They have also bred in a few places in Thurston County. Rarely, non-breeding birds are seen in a few areas of western Washington, as far north as Anacortes (Skagit County).	Outside of the breeding season, they roost communally, sometimes in groups of more than 100 birds.  Density in Washington is not this high, and such large congregations are not seen here. Small groups of around five birds are more common. While hunting, kites often hover over open fields.	Small mammals, especially voles, make up the majority of the White-tailed Kite's diet.		White-tailed Kites form a monogamous pair in December, and the pair stays together year round. Nest building starts in January. They nest in the top of a tree, usually 20-50 feet off the ground. Both members of the pair help build the nest, which is made of twigs and lined with grass, weeds, or leaves. The male brings food to the female as she incubates 4 eggs for 30-32 days. Once the eggs hatch, the male continues to bring food to the brooding female, who feeds it to the young. The young begin to fly at 30-35 days, but don't start catching their own prey for at least another month. The pair may raise a second brood.	While White-tailed Kites have no known regular migration, they do wander widely, especially when prey is scarce.	white-tailed_kite				
185	21	Emberiza	rustica	Rustic Bunting		LC		Accidental winter visitor. Two records from Kent (King County) (two years apart'possibly the same bird) and one from Leavenworth (Chelan County).		1								rustic_bunting				
186	68	Empidonax	alnorum	Alder Flycatcher		LC		The Washington Bird Records Committee has accepted three records of Alder Flycatcher, all of them from the month of June: at Havillah (Okanogan County) in 2004 and again in 2006, and at Marblemount (Skagit County) in 2004.		1								alder_flycatcher				
187	68	Empidonax	difficilis	Pacific-slope Flycatcher	Common summer west. Fairly common east.	LC	The Pacific-slope Flycatcher is listed on the Audubon~Washington watch list. The Breeding Bird Survey has recorded a significant decline in Washington from 1980-2000. While man-made structures may add potential nesting sites, logging and clearing underbrush degrades the habitat.	The Pacific-slope Flycatcher is yellowish underneath, with the yellow extending up to the throat. It has a broad bill, and its lower mandible is yellow. The white eye-ring extends to the back in a teardrop shape. The juvenile has two buffy wing-bars that change to white as it matures. These features are distinctive, as is its voice, making separation from other Empidonax species in its range relatively easy.		1	The habitat of Pacific-slope Flycatchers includes both deciduous and mixed deciduous-coniferous forests. These birds are generally found in the sub-canopy of heavy, wet forest. Streamsides and shady areas with shrubby understory are often used. Along the outer coast, they are the only Empidonax flycatchers commonly found in the dense, wet rain forest of this region.	In 1989, the Western Flycatcher was split into two species, the Pacific-slope Flycatcher and the Cordilleran Flycatcher. There is not a distinct difference between vocalizations where the ranges meet in southeastern Washington. Because of this, the split is disputed and the status may be changed again once further study has been done. Pacific-slope Flycatchers are common throughout their Washington range. They breed in forests from low to moderate elevations throughout Washington, including streamside forests in the steppe zone of eastern Washington. Cordilleran Flycatchers, or intergrades between the two, may breed in coniferous forests in the Blue Mountains of southeastern Washington.	The Pacific-slope Flycatcher generally watches from a perch in the lower or middle canopy, and flies out to catch prey in the air. It also hovers in front of foliage or twigs and gleans prey from their surfaces. This species can be very hard to see, but can be found readily once its call is known--a distinct, upslurred suweet, or a high, thin tseep.	Pacific-slope Flycatchers eat mostly flying insects as well as some crawling insects.	Common at low to moderate elevations in closed-canopy coniferous and hardwood forests from Cascade crest west. East of crest, uncommon at middle elevations in riparian corridors and in humid coniferous forests.	Pacific-slope Flycatchers usually select natural sites such as trees for nesting. Very occasionally they nest under man-made bridges or eaves. Nests usually have some sort of shelter from above. Natural nesting sites include tree stumps and upturned tree roots, which are typically closer to the ground than nests on man-made objects. The female builds the nest of moss, grass, rootlets, bark, and lichen, and lines it with hair and feathers. She usually incubates three to four eggs for 14 to 15 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at about 15 days. The young stay near the nest for a few days after fledging.	These medium-distance migrants arrive in Washington in late April or early May. Most birds leave in late July and early August; however, some stay into mid-September. They head to the lowlands of western and southern Mexico for the winter.	pacific-slope_flycatcher	PSFL			
188	68	Empidonax	hammondii	Hammond's Flycatcher	Fairly common summer resident	LC	Hammond's Flycatchers were once common in the Puget Sound lowlands and the lowland forests on the eastern side of the Cascades, but extensive cutting of these forests has removed this habitat. They are listed on the Audubon~Washington watch list, although Breeding Bird Survey results indicate they have been increasing significantly in Washington in recent years. Some researchers have recommended, based on habitat requirement studies, that Hammond's Flycatchers need stands at least 20 acres in size and 80-90 years old to sustain populations.	Like other Empidonax flycatchers, Hammond's Flycatchers are olive-gray above and buffy-yellow below, with a slight crest, two white wing-bars, and white eye-ring. The eye-ring of the Hammond's is uneven and almost invisible in some birds. The bill is dark, which may help distinguish it from other Empidonax flycatchers. These small flycatchers have long wings, a relatively short tail, and very small bill.		1	Regardless of the time of year, Hammond's Flycatchers inhabit cool, forested regions. During the breeding season, they use large stands of mature, wet conifer and mixed forests with closed canopies and sparse understories.	Hammond's Flycatchers can be found from late April to August throughout Washington where there is appropriate habitat. They breed in wet coniferous forests, from the lowlands to the tree line, although they are most common at middle elevations. During migration they are common in the lowlands, including wooded areas of the shrub-steppe zone.	These aerial foragers are found high in the canopy where they watch from a perch and fly out to catch prey in mid-air, then return to the perch to eat. They sometimes forage from lower perches, gleaning prey directly off the foliage, or hunting on the ground. The last two foraging styles are more common early in the breeding season. Both Hammond's and the similar Dusky Flycatchers wag their tails in a slow, up-down motion. (This behavior may help narrow down the choices when trying to distinguish among the Empidonax flycatchers).	Insects, especially beetles, caterpillars, moths, and flies, are the most common prey.	Common in relatively intact low- and mid-elevation conifer forests of central and eastern King County, southwestern Kitsap County (Green Mountain/Gold Mountain vicinity), and Kittitas County. Rare elsewhere in Puget Trough lowlands in extensive remnant conifer stands. Also nests in tall cottonwood groves, as along Snoqualmie River at Carnation. In Kittitas County, most common in somewhat wetter conifer stands on north-facing slopes at middle elevations as well as along riparian corridors in ponderosa pine belt. Prefers dense forests with high canopy and little understory.	The male sings to defend a territory and attract a mate. The female builds the nest, which is generally in the lower third of the canopy of a tall conifer, placed well out from the trunk on a horizontal branch. The nest is made of spider webs, grass, and plant fiber, lined with feathers and fur. The female incubates three to four eggs for 15 to 16 days, and broods the newly hatched young. Both parents help feed the young, which begin to fly at 16 to 18 days. The young often remain together, near the parents, for a week or so after they fledge.	These hardy birds undertake a prolonged migration in the fall and spring. They start arriving in Washington by mid-April, but many higher-altitude breeders remain in the lowlands until early to mid-May, arriving in Washington in late May. They start heading south again by mid-August, with the last birds leaving in late September. They winter in the pine-oak woods of Mexico and Central America.	hammonds_flycatcher	HAFL			
189	68	Empidonax	minimus	Least Flycatcher	Rare summer resident, mostly east.	LC	Least Flycatchers are widespread and common throughout most of their range. However, Washington lies on the western edge of the range, and therefore Least Flycatchers are uncommon here. They are not found breeding in urbanized areas. They have been known to shift territories into the forest interior in response to disturbances such as logging. This suggests that large contiguous forest tracts with limited disturbances are required for this species to remain common.	The Least Flycatcher is the smallest flycatcher found in Washington. Like other confusingly similar Empidonax flycatchers, the Least has two white wing-bars, a white eye-ring, olive upperparts, and yellowish-cream underparts.		1	Least Flycatchers are found at lower elevations in deciduous or mixed woods, often along rivers. They breed in semi-open, mature, and maturing woods. It has been suggested that Least Flycatchers require large tracts of forest to thrive.	Least Flycatchers are the least commonly occuring Empidonax flycatchers in Washington.  They are found in Eastern Washington in forested habitat, especially in aspen groves. The best place to see them is Okanagan County. West of the Cascades there are only a few records, but at least two singing males have been reported in recent years.	On breeding territories Least Flycatchers are aggressive to intruders, both their own and other species. They are known to attack Brown-headed Cowbirds, and the low rate of cowbird parasitization of their nests seems to indicate that their defense is effective. Least Flycatcher territories are often clustered together.	This species forages by flying out from a dead branch and catching insects in the air. They also glean insects from leaves. They tend to forage from the high shrub-layer up into the canopy.		Male and female select the nest-site in an upright fork of the lower-to-middle section of a small, deciduous tree. The female builds a cup-nest made of bark strips and fibers, grass, plant down, and spider and caterpillar webbing. She lays four eggs, incubating them for fourteen days.  Both parents feed the young, who fledge at about fourteen days.	Atypical of most migratory birds, adult Least Flycatchers migrate south before molting in the fall. First-year birds molt before and during migration. Some populations appear to head east before they turn south to Mexico. Males arrive on the breeding grounds in the spring ahead of females, but no significant difference has been found in fall movement. They return to Washington in late May and leave by mid-August. Adults spend a very short period of time on the breeding grounds, only about two months. The entire time is needed to raise a single brood.	least_flycatcher				
190	68	Empidonax	oberholseri	Dusky Flycatcher	Fairly common summer resident east, rare west.	LC	Dusky Flycatchers are relatively common throughout the western United States and Canada and appear to be faring well in general, perhaps due to forestry practices that thin stands and leave small forest openings. However, according to Breeding Bird Survey data, they have experienced a small, not statistically significant decline in Washington from 1966-2002.The species is particularly vulnerable to bad weather, consequently, a spring rain or snowstorm can kill an entire local breeding population.	The Dusky Flycatcher is very similar in appearance to the Hammond's Flycatcher, with only a few subtle differences. Like other Empidonax flycatchers, the Dusky usually has two white wing-bars, a white eye-ring, olive upperparts, and yellowish-cream underparts. Dusky Flycatchers have longer tails and bills and shorter wings than the Hammond's. It is best to use range, habitat, and song, along with an advanced field guide, to identify this Empidonax group. The range of the Dusky Flycatcher overlaps with two other, closely related flycatchers (Gray and Hammond's). When the three species come into contact, they defend territories from one another and do not interbreed.		1	In Washington, Dusky Flycatchers are found primarily in dry, open, conifer forests with a shrubby understory, Ponderosa pine, and clear-cuts. During migration they are less restricted than during the breeding season and can be found in brushy areas, along streams, and in shady, broadleaved woodlands. Look for them in the Ponderosa pine zone east of the Cascade crest, flying out from the low to middle branches.	Breeding populations can be found in the Blue Mountains, on the East Slope of the Cascades, and in the Spokane area. Migrants can be seen in the central Columbia Basin and along the west slope of the Cascades. Non-breeding birds have been reported in several low-lying locations west of the Cascades.	Dusky Flycatchers view their prey from exposed perches and fly out from the perch to catch the insects in the air. Sometimes birds hover near foliage or bark to catch flying insects. Occasionally they pounce on prey on the ground. Both Dusky and Hammond's Flycatchers flick their tails in an up-down motion, while the Gray Flycatcher flicks its tail down and then up. This behavior may help narrow down the choices when trying to distinguish between the Empidonax flycatchers.	Dusky Flycatchers catch insects in the air, perching on dead branches between foraging flights.	Common east of Cascade crest in dry, open conifer forests with shrubby understory at middle to high elevations. A few BBA records from clearcuts at moderate and high elevations west of crest in King County, but breeding not confirmed.	Dusky Flycatchers nest in Ponderosa pine areas where there is dense cover above and below the nest. The nest is placed, on average, six feet above the ground, in an upright fork in a shrub or small tree. The female builds a cup-shaped nest of grasses and other fine plant material, animal hair, and feathers. As the female incubates four eggs, the male brings her food. Once the eggs hatch, both the male and the female feed the young. Nest-building and egg-laying can be delayed by inclement weather.	Dusky Flycatchers migrate to the southwestern United States and Mexico. During migration they are rarely seen passing through coastal Washington. In spring, males arrive on the breeding grounds about the second week of May and females a week later. By mid- to late August they are on their way south again.	dusky_flycatcher				
191	68	Empidonax	traillii	Willow Flycatcher	Common summer resident.	LC	This species has declined in some areas due to loss of streamside habitat, and the US Fish and Wildlife Service lists the southwestern population as a subspecies-of-concern. Willow Flycatchers in Washington experienced significant declines from 1966 to 1979, according to the Breeding Bird Survey. During the period between 1980 and 2000, the species still suffered a decline, but to a lesser degree, indicating that there may be a reversal of the trend, or at least stabilization, in the years to come. Despite their decline, Willow Flycatchers are still very common in western Washington. They are less common and more locally distributed east of the Cascades. River-corridor channelization, overgrazing, dam construction, and urbanization all degrade Willow Flycatcher habitat. With the listing of many Northwest salmon populations under the Endangered Species Act, many rivers are undergoing restoration to improve the habitat for salmon, which should also improve habitat for Willow Flycatchers and other riparian species.	The Willow Flycatcher is one of the largest flycatchers in the genus Empidonax, with a relatively flat forehead and distinct peak on the rear of its crown. It is gray in color, with buffy or light-gray wing-bars and an almost invisible white eye-ring. The lack of visible eye-ring helps distinguish it from the other Empidonax flycatchers. It has a pale breast and white throat, and the base of the lower mandible is yellow. Its bill is broad with a pale lower mandible and a long, broad, straight-sided tail.		1	This aptly named bird is found in willow thickets and other brushy areas near streams, marshes, or other wetlands, and in clear-cuts and other open areas with nearby trees or brush.	Willow Flycatchers are common in appropriate habitats such as clear-cuts, to elevations of at least 3,000 feet on both sides of the Cascades. They are rare along the outer coast and uncommon on the western side of the Olympic Peninsula. Migrants and non-breeders are sometimes seen in the Columbia Basin.	Willow Flycatchers typically forage in the shrub layer, or in low trees. They watch from a perch, fly out to grasp prey in quick darts, and return to the perch. They also glean prey from twigs and branches as they hover in the foliage.	Insects, especially flying insects, are the most common prey.	Common at lower elevations in wetlands, shrubby areas, and clearcuts west of Cascade crest. Uncommon and local in shrubby wetlands, such as beaver ponds, at moderate elevations east of crest.	The male sings to defend his territory, although the female has been known to sing as well. The female builds a low nest in a willow, bracken fern, or rose. The nest is usually an open cup of grass and bark, lined with soft plant down and other material. Sometimes strips of plant material hang from the bottom of the nest. The female incubates three eggs for 13 to 14 days, and both parents help feed the young. The young take their first flights at 13 to 15 days, but often remain near the nest for three or four more days, and continue to follow their parents around the territory until they are 24 to 25 days old. The short breeding season allows for only one clutch a year.	Willow Flycatchers winter in the Amazon Basin and are one of the latest birds to arrive in Washington in the spring. It is often the end of May before they are back on their breeding grounds. They head south in early fall, leaving Washington in late August or early September.	willow_flycatcher	WIFL			
192	68	Empidonax	wrightii	Gray Flycatcher	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	Gray Flycatchers were first recorded in Washington in 1970, and first found breeding here in 1972. Since then, they have expanded their range considerably, reaching southern British Columbia in 1986. This rapid expansion may have been due to forest management practices that cleared understory and thinned stands of Ponderosa pine forests, creating the park-like habitat that Gray Flycatchers prefer.	The Gray Flycatcher is pale grayish overall, and its underparts are paler than those of the other Empidonax flycatchers. It has two white wing-bars and an uneven white eye-ring.		1	Across much of its range, the Gray Flycatcher prefers sagebrush and juniper. In Washington, however, it is primarily a bird of open Ponderosa pine forests with grassy understories. It does extend into sagebrush in some parts of Washington, but mostly sticks to park-like Ponderosa pine stands lacking a shrub-layer. Most of these stands have been logged or thinned, some multiple times.	Gray Flycatchers are very rare in western Washington, and are more likely to be seen in Eastern Washington Ponderosa pine forests and shrub-steppe. They are seldom spotted in Washington during migration.	One of the best ways to distinguish between Gray and other Empidonax flycatchers is through behavior. While most Empids flick their tails in a rapid up-down motion, Gray Flycatchers flick their tails much more slowly. The pattern is down, then up; the others flick the tail up, then down. When foraging, they watch from an exposed perch, flying out to catch prey in mid-air, on the ground, or in the foliage. When they overlap with Dusky Flycatchers, they will defend territories from Duskies.	Gray Flycatchers eat insects.	Uncommon to locally fairly common in Kittitas County, increasing beyond close of atlas period. Inhabits open ponderosa pine forests with grass understory. Gray Flycatchers first recorded in Washington in 1970, nesting along Wenas Creek just south of Kittitas County line. Species continues to expand north and east from core Washington nesting range in Yakima and Klickitat Counties.	This monogamous species sometimes occurs in loose colonies when habitat is favorable. In Ponderosa pine habitat, nests are typically placed on a large, horizontal branch, against the trunk. The female builds the nest, although the male sometimes helps. The nest is a bulky cup of loose grass, needles, bark, and other material, lined with plant down, feathers, and hair. The female incubates three to four eggs for 14 to 15 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at about 16 days. The parents continue to feed the young for another 14 days. Over much of their breeding range, they lay a second clutch after the first clutch fledges.	Gray Flycatchers migrate shorter distances than many of their relatives, wintering in southern Arizona, Baja California, and Mexico. They arrive in Washington at the end of April and leave in August.	gray_flycatcher				
193	3	Eremophila	alpestris	Horned Lark	Common resident east, uncommon west.	LC	Populations of this species appear to be relatively stable across the continent. However, the Streaked Horned Lark subspecies has declined sharply in western Washington. Urbanization, conversion of prairies to agriculture, and the introduction of exotic plants have played a role in its decline.	The Horned Lark is a small songbird with a dark facial mask and a dark breast band. The 'horns' are two little tufts of black feathers on the head. Horned Larks are found around the world, with a great number of subspecies. Three subspecies with distinct coloration and markings breed in Washington: the Streaked Horned Lark, the Pallid Horned Lark, and the Dusky Horned Lark.  Horned Larks have reddish-brown upperparts streaked with dark brown, pale underparts, and a yellow face and breast. Females are duller in coloration. Immatures are dark with light spots. Overhead, the dark tail with narrow white edges is evident.		1	Horned Larks inhabit open ground with short grass or scattered bushes.  The three subspecies that breed in Washington are ecologically distinct. The Streaked Horned Lark is found on prairies, sandbars, and grassy ocean dunes in western Washington. The Pallid Horned Lark nests in dry alpine habitats. In eastern Washington, the Dusky Horned Lark occurs in low-elevation steppe and agricultural habitats such as wheat fields. Other subspecies migrate through Washington and may be found in other open habitats.	The Streaked Horned Lark is local and uncommon along coastal beaches of western Washington and on sandbars in the Lower Columbia River. It can also be found locally on western Washington prairies, such as at McChord Air Force Base and Fort Lewis (Pierce County). The Pallid Horned Lark breeds only in the Cascade and Olympic Mountains (Mt Adams, Mt Rainier, and Glacier Peak). It winters in the surrounding lowlands. The Dusky Horned Lark is abundant and widespread during the breeding season in the sagebrush flats and wheat fields of eastern Washington.	Horned Larks often join mixed flocks of Lapland Longspurs, Snow Buntings, Dark-eyed Juncos, and American Pipits. In the non-breeding season, they forage in large nomadic flocks. They feed while walking and running on the ground.  Males perform a flight-song display high above the ground. During the breeding season, courtship, nesting, and feeding take place on territories. The song is a high-pitched tinkling made while in flight.	Horned Larks eat mostly seeds of grasses, weeds, and waste grain but feed insects to their young. Adults consume some insects as well.	Subspecies <i>E.a. merrilli</i> abundant and widespread breeder in pastures, rangeland, and steppe habitats of eastern Kittitas County. Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) maps breeding range of subspecies <i>E.a. alpina</i> along crest of Wenatchee Mountains from Ingalls Peak to Trico Mountain; prediction not confirmed by BBA records, but survey efforts perhaps inadequate in this remote area. Declining coastal subspecies <i>E.a. strigata</i> not detected in our BBA surveys, and not projected to breed in four-county area by Washington Gap report.	Male residents establish and defend territories as early as January and February. The female selects the nest site, usually on open ground next to a clump of grass or other low feature. She also builds the nest, a slight depression lined with plant material such as grass. The nest often has a flat 'doorstep' of pebbles. The female incubates 3-4 eggs. Both parents feed the young. The young walk, run, and leave the nest well before they can fly. Pairs in lowland areas may have 2-3 broods per year, but high altitude/latitude pairs have only a single brood.	Some of the more northerly subspecies of Horned Lark winter in Washington, arriving in mid-November to early December and leaving in late winter or early spring. Pallid Horned Larks winter in the lowlands that surround their alpine breeding habitat. Dusky and Streaked Horned Larks move south in the winter but arrive back on the breeding grounds in early spring.	horned_lark	HOLA			
194	64	Eudocimus	albus	White Ibis		LC		One record, from Pacific County in late December 2000'January 2001.		1								white_ibis				
195	30	Euphagus	carolinus	Rusty Blackbird	Rare winter resident.	VU	Rusty Blackbirds are the least well known of the North American blackbirds. While most of their breeding range is remote from human disturbance, their wintering grounds are more vulnerable, and more study is needed to ascertain their status.	Rusty Blackbirds are rare winter visitors to Washington. We are most likely to see these birds in non-breeding season, in the plumage that gives them their name. Non-breeding males are black with rusty edges on their feathers. Females are lighter brown all over, with buff-colored mottling and gray rumps. Rusty Blackbirds are fairly slender birds with long wings and tails. Both sexes have yellow eyes in all plumages. During breeding season, males are black with slightly iridescent purple-green plumage, and females are dull brown. Male Brewer's Blackbirds look similar, but lack the rusty edging on their feathers, are glossier during the breeding season, and have longer tails.		1	Rusty Blackbirds nest in spruce bogs and other wet, forested areas throughout Canada and Alaska. They often nest in small clear-cuts or openings caused by natural disturbances. During migration and winter, they inhabit wooded swamps, but forage in open areas and cattle feedlots. They typically prefer wooded areas more than do other blackbird species.	Rusty Blackbirds are rare but regular fall and winter visitors throughout lowland Washington. Birds have been seen in Whatcom, Snohomish, Clark, Thurston, King, and Okanogan Counties, and are found annually in the Walla Walla area. They breed as far south as southern British Columbia, but are more common breeders in the central interior part of that province.	In Washington, Rusty Blackbirds may be mixed in with flocks of Brewer's or Red-winged Blackbirds. They walk along the ground while foraging, often turning leaves over to expose food, and will feed at pond or wetland edges, sticking their heads underwater to take food from the bottom.	Rusty Blackbirds eat many aquatic insects and other small invertebrates. They also eat seeds and waste grain, especially during winter.		Sometimes Rusty Blackbirds breed in small, loose colonies, but isolated, monogamous pairs are the norm. Nests are usually close to or directly above the water, in dense trees or shrubs. The female builds a bulky open cup with a lichen foundation, a body of grass, twigs, and decaying plant material, and a fine grass lining. She incubates 3 to 5 eggs for about two weeks and then broods the young after they hatch. Both sexes feed the young, which leave the nest about 11 days after hatching. They cannot fly when they leave the nest, but learn within a few days.	Rusty Blackbirds travel between their northern breeding grounds and southern US wintering grounds during the late fall and early spring.	rusty_blackbird				
196	30	Euphagus	cyanocephalus	Brewer's Blackbird	Common resident.	LC	Brewer's Blackbirds have benefited from the conversion of eastern Washington shrub-steppe habitat into farmland. Other human development has also been beneficial for this widespread and abundant species, as it does well in human-altered habitats. Christmas Bird Count data suggest that the wintering population of Brewer's Blackbirds in Washington may be in decline. However, this may be a reflection of Christmas Bird Counts that have been added within the past thirty years in areas where Brewer's Blackbirds are not common.  The Breeding Bird Survey shows a small, not statistically significant increase in population between 1980 and 2002.	Adult male Brewer's Blackbirds are black with iridescent, purple-green plumage during the breeding season. Non-breeding and first-year males are brownish-black, with less iridescence than mature males in breeding season. Males in all plumages have yellow eyes. Females are dull gray-brown and have brown eyes. They are fairly slender birds, with long wings and tails.		1	Brewer's Blackbirds are most often associated with agricultural fields that have brushy edges. They can be found in other open areas as well, including parks, campgrounds, parking lots, wetlands, and suburban and urban settings. In Washington, they are also seen in shrub-steppe habitats, especially around grazing areas.	Brewer's Blackbirds are permanent residents throughout much of Washington. Large groups gather in the fall at feedlots. They can be abundant in the Puget Trough and Columbia Basin (to the Tri-Cities area) in winter. As breeders, they are more common in eastern Washington (where they are common throughout) than in western Washington. In western Washington, they commonly breed throughout lowlands in the Puget Trough, from the San Juan Islands, west to Sequim (Clallam County), south to Vancouver (Clark County), and west to Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County).	Brewer's Blackbirds form flocks outside of the breeding season, and may winter in mixed flocks with other blackbirds. They typically forage on the ground and often follow farm machinery, taking advantage of food turned up by plows.	Insects, seeds, berries, and waste grain make up the Brewer's Blackbird's diet.	Common at low and middle elevations in central and eastern Kittitas County in variety of habitats, including agricultural, wetlands, steppe, and cities. Uncommon in openings within eastside dry-forest zones. In western counties, fairly common in lowlands, usually near farms; also locally near certain large parking lots in urbanized areas, but rare in and around Seattle. Large-scale conversion of steppe to agricultural uses has benefited this species.	Brewer's Blackbirds are monogamous and sometimes nest in small, loose colonies. They usually nest in trees, but may nest on the ground, in shrubs, or in tall grass. The female builds a bulky, open cup-nest of twigs, grass, weeds, and needles, lined with grass, rootlets, and hair. Mud or manure often holds the base together. The female incubates 4 to 6 eggs for 12 to 14 days, and both male and female feed the young. The young leave the nest 13 to 14 days after hatching. Each pair raises one or two broods a year.	Some Brewer's Blackbirds are year-round residents, and some (generally those that breed at higher altitudes or in more northern areas) migrate into milder areas.  The birds that migrate move to the more moderate lowlands of the state including western interior valleys, Puget Sound, and the Columbia lowlands, or they travel farther south to areas across the southern United States and Mexico.	brewers_blackbird	BRBL			
197	46	Falcipennis	canadensis	Spruce Grouse	Uncommon resident northeast.	LC	Local populations fluctuate in numbers and may have declined in the southern portions of their range.  These fluctuations are primarily in response to forest maturation, with predation pressure also having some influence.  Spruce Grouse are adapted to forest fires, which create small patches of habitat at various ages.  Clear cuts can mimic this effect, if they are small and interspersed with multiple-aged stands.  Large clear cuts and even aged stands can have a significant negative impact on the population.	The Spruce Grouse is a medium-sized, stocky, chicken-like bird with a short neck and a short tail.  The female is overall gray or rufous, and cryptically patterned.  The male is similar, but has red eyebrows and a black throat.  The male also has a black tail with white spots that are distinctive when the tail is fanned in display.  His body is a bolder black than the female's, with white spots on the body and white lines on the face		1	Spruce Grouse live in dense pine and spruce woods with mossy ground in northern montane environments.  They are roughly distributed in an elevational gradient with Ruffed and Blue Grouse, with Spruce Grouse occupying the highest elevations, typically above 4,000 feet in Washington, although there is a wide altitudinal overlap.	Spruce Grouse are uncommon in northern Washington east of the Cascade crest.  They can be found west of the Cascades in Whatcom County and northern Skagit County.  They are rare at high elevations in suitable forests along the Cascade crest, south into Yakima County.  Most sightings are in Okanogan, Ferry, Stevens, and Pend Oreille Counties.  Many experts claim that they do not occur in the Olympic Mountains, although there is some equivocal evidence to the contrary.  They also occur in very low numbers in the southern Cascades, but are easily confused with Blue Grouse which are more common in that region.	They are often found in small flocks, which in summer are usually family groups.  They are noted for their boldness with humans, often feeding on berries or spruce needles mere feet from observers, a behavior that has earned them the nickname 'fool-hen.'  Males display during the breeding season by beating the air with their wings while walking along a tree trunk or while in flight, resulting in muffled thumping sounds.	Spruce Grouse feed on the ground in the summer and in trees in the winter.  In the winter they eat conifer needles, mostly from pine or spruce.  In other seasons they supplement the diet of needles with fresh, green shoots and leaves, berries, flowers, insects, snails, and fungi.  Young birds eat mostly insects.	Core Washington range in mountains across northern tier of counties, from Cascade crest to northeastern corner of state; also occurs sparingly along east slope of Cascades south to Yakima County. Status poorly known in Kittitas County, but appears to be rare breeder in forests at middle to high elevations; single confirmed BBA record in 1999 near Mount Clifty. Better studied in Yakima County, where optimal habitat is described as subalpine fir forest at 4,200&#8211;5,700 feet elevation with groundcover of grouseberry (Stepniewski 1999).	One male mates with several females, and the females provide all the parental care.  The nest is built on the ground, a shallow depression under dense cover, lined with a few needles and leaves.  The female lays and incubates 5-7 eggs.  The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and find their own food, but the female continues to tend the young, keeping them warm at night and in cool weather.	Most Spruce Grouse do not migrate, but some do move short distances (fewer than 10 miles) between separate summer and winter ranges.  They migrate on foot, and females are more likely to migrate, and go farther, than males.	spruce_grouse				
198	22	Falco	columbarius	Merlin	Uncommon winter.  Fairly common migrant. Rare breeder.	LC	Previously there was concern that the population had been negatively affected by pollutants, but it has recently been shown that no changes in abundance have been recorded over the past 40 years. Some evidence indicates that wintering populations may actually be increasing, due to increased breeding success in the north.  Habitat loss and potential loss of wintering grounds (for migrant populations) are potential concerns.  The status of the Black race is not well known, since it is one of our rarest and most elusive nesters.	Merlins are small, compact falcons. Three subspecies are found in Washington. The Black Merlin is solid black on the head and back, and dark with a minimal amount of light streaking on the breast. It has a white throat patch. The Taiga Merlin is lighter in color than the Black Merlin, with a bluish-black back, a white eyebrow line, and white bars across the tail.  The Prairie Merlin is lighter in color than the other two.		1	Merlins breed in rugged terrain that provides both trees for nests and open areas for hunting. In Washington, they can be found in very small numbers near openings in coniferous forests in the Puget Sound area, along the Cascade crest, and at other high-altitude areas in the North Cascades and in northeastern Washington. During migration and winter, they are found in more diverse habitats, including coastal areas, estuaries, agricultural lands, and suburban towns	The Black Merlin is a very rare breeder in coastal forests along the outer coast of the state, the Hood Canal area, and Puget Sound. The Taiga Merlin is a very rare breeder in high-elevation forests of the north Cascades and northeastern Washington where boreal conditions exist. Prairie Merlins occur in the state, passing through in migration.  Merlins are commonly found throughout western Washington, including urban areas, in winter and during migration. In eastern Washington, Merlins are uncommon in winter and during migration.	Merlins capture airborne prey, employing a level sprint with abrupt turns. Rarely do they use the steep dive technique for which their larger relative, the Peregrine Falcon, is well known. They cache extra food on a branch or in an unused nest. Sometimes they fly low to the ground, surprising their prey. Merlins practice a variety of acrobatic, in-flight, courtship displays. They are cantankerous birds, seldom passing up a chance to hassle another raptor.	Small birds make up the majority of the Merlin's diet. Rodents, bats, and reptiles are also taken, as well as large insects such as dragonflies, which are especially hunted by fledglings in the late summer. Coastal Merlins take advantage of large numbers of migrating shorebirds during the fall and winter. Starling flocks often attract Merlins.		Merlins are monogamous. The female typically lays 4-5 eggs and does most of the incubation. The male provides the female with food, and takes over incubation duties while she eats. When the young hatch, the female broods and the male hunts. He brings food back to the female, who in turn, feeds it to the young.  Both parents help rear the young.  Merlins usually use other birds' old nests, or rarely, a natural cavity. They mainly nest in conifers between 18 and 36 feet high in cities, or, in open prairie, in old crows' nests.	The Black Merlin subspecies is generally non-migratory, but the Taiga Merlin migrates south from Canada into the US, Central America, and northern South America. Females head south ahead of the males, typically in mid-August.  In spring, males arrive ahead of the females. Merlins migrate during the day, but may begin to move up to two hours before dawn, and thus are often missed in migration counts and hawk watches.	merlin	MERL			
199	22	Falco	mexicanus	Prairie Falcon	Uncommon resident east. Rare west.	LC	Habitat loss has limited both nest sites and foraging habitat throughout the range of the Prairie Falcon.  The availability of cliffs for nesting, with adequate surrounding habitat, is a limiting factor for Prairie Falcons in Washington, and habitat loss is their most significant threat.  Large-scale agricultural development, while it provides wintering habitat, reduces the suitability of the area for nesting.  However, although numbers have declined in some developed areas, it appears that the current population is stable overall.  Unfortunately, the shrub-steppe, where many Prairie Falcons nest, is one of the most endangered habitats in Washington, and this puts Prairie Falcons at risk.  They are listed on both the Audubon~Washington watch list and the Washington Gap Analysis at-risk list.	Prairie Falcons are similar in size and markings to Peregrine Falcons, but Prairie Falcons are lighter brown in color, and their breasts are more spotted than barred.  Prairie Falcons also have white behind their eyes.  In flight, they can be distinguished from the Peregrine Falcon by their more rounded wingtips and dark axillaries and coverts, which make for distinctive field marks from below.		1	During the breeding season, Prairie Falcons inhabit dry, open areas with cliffs and bluffs for nesting.  In late summer, many move to alpine and sub-alpine meadows.  During winter, they can often be found in agricultural areas.	Prairie Falcons are uncommon breeders in the shrub-steppe zone of eastern Washington, rarely moving up into the Okanogan and Methow Valleys.  Look for them where there are basalt coulees with cliff faces for nesting. In summer, alpine meadows are a good place to find them. In winter, they are also uncommon in these areas, and are rare in western Washington farmlands.	Prairie Falcons usually catch prey by flying low over the ground.  They are very vocal during courtship and are often heard before they are seen.	Mammals, especially ground squirrels and rabbits, and ground-dwelling birds such as California Quails and Chukars, make up the majority of the Prairie Falcon's diet.  In winter, Horned Larks and Western Meadowlarks become a significant source of prey.	Records generalized to full township/ranges; true population density thus much thinner than symbolized. Uncommon in Kittitas County in canyons and on cliffs and bluffs, primarily in eastern county below ponderosa pine zone. Hunts and occasionally winters in nesting habitats, but may disperse to high elevations above tree line during summer, and usually moves to open agricultural areas in winter. Individuals can be found in alpine habitats by August. Preys more regularly on mammals than does any other Washington falcon. May be declining in tandem with state's ground squirrel populations.	Prairie Falcons generally do not breed until their second year.  The breeding cycle of the Prairie Falcon coincides with the most productive period of the shrub-steppe season, when prey species are flourishing.  Courtship lasts from late February to April, and they nest on basalt cliffs in recessed or otherwise protected spots.  They sometimes use an old hawk or raven nest, but do not nest in trees and do not build their own nests.  Instead, they position the 3 to 5 eggs in debris scraped from the nest ledge.  The female performs most of the incubation, which lasts about 31 days.  During the time the female is incubating the eggs, and for the first week or so after the chicks hatch, the male provides food.  When the young are over a week old, the female broods them less than half the time, and helps to bring food.  The young leave the nest at about 38 days, and the parents continue to feed them for 30 to 35 days after they fledge.  Most birds have left the breeding grounds by late June.	Prairie Falcons shift habitats periodically throughout the year, and some may migrate long distances.  In late summer, ground squirrels move underground to escape the dry, hot environment.  Prairie Falcons, losing their major source of prey, leave the nesting grounds at this time and head to higher elevations, where snowmelt prolongs the growing season.  In late fall, some birds return to the shrub-steppe, and many spend the winter in open fields and agricultural areas, taking advantage of the flocking birds that winter there.  Some also move short distances south and east during the winter.	prairie_falcon				
200	22	Falco	peregrinus	Peregrine Falcon	Fairly common winter. Uncommon breeder.	LC	Peregrine Falcons were severely endangered (and actually extirpated from eastern North America) in the mid-20th Century, mostly due to the pesticide DDT, which softens eggshells and results in widespread nest failure.  With the ban of DDT in the United States, the falcons have begun to recover, but have required reintroduction in many areas to regain a foothold where they had disappeared.  They are considered a species of special concern by the US Fish and Wildlife Department, and are listed as an at-risk species by the Washington Gap Analysis.  In Washington, Peregrine Falcons reached a low of four pairs in 1980.  In 2000, 56 pairs were counted, doubling the number counted just seven years prior.  Peregrine Falcons can now be found in most parts of the state where there are cliffs or structures for nesting and sufficient prey.  The population is still small and is highly vulnerable to disturbance and environmental contaminants, but productivity levels are high and the population continues to increase.  As a result of this recovery, the federal government has down-listed them from Endangered to Sensitive.  Two subspecies breed in Washington.  Peale's Peregrine Falcon is found along the coast and in Puget Sound.  The Continental Peregrine Falcon, or Anatum Peregrine, inhabits eastern Washington.  It was extirpated from the state but has been reintroduced in a number of locations and seems to be recovering.	The Peregrine Falcon is considered by many to be the most impressive bird of prey.  It is larger than the American Kestrel and Merlin, similar in size to the Prairie Falcon, but smaller than the Gyrfalcon.  The Peregrine Falcon is built for speed, with long pointed wings and a narrow tail.  Adults have slate-gray upperparts and a gray 'helmet' that extends below their eyes.  Their underparts are uniformly and thinly barred, with the exception of their white chins and throats.  Juveniles appear similar to adults, but are darker and heavily streaked below, and more brown than gray above.		1	Peregrine Falcons are typically found hunting in open areas, especially along the coast and near other bodies of water that provide habitat for their prey.  They nest on cliffs and cliff-like structures, so during the breeding season they are usually found near mountainous or rocky areas, or man-made structures that substitute as cliffs.	The range of the Peregrine Falcon appears to be changing rapidly as new breeding locations are found every year.  In western Washington, Peregrine Falcons nest along the coast, in the San Juan Islands, in Puget Sound, and even in downtown Seattle and Tacoma.  They are also nesting on the western slope of the Cascades, at Mt. Si. There are few nesting records east of the Cascades, but a pair has nested in Klickitat County for several years, another on the Columbia River cliffs in Kittitas County, and still another on a bridge in Spokane. Birds have been introduced in Skamania, Lewis, Spokane, Asotin, and Yakima Counties.  Areas of the Cascades and other mountainous areas below about 4,000 feet, and essentially the length of the Columbia and Snake Rivers, as well as certain stretches of the Okanogan and Spokane Rivers, offer appropriate breeding habitat.  In winter, Peregrines can be found in the southwestern portion of Puget Sound (where Thurston and Mason Counties meet), in the Chehalis River valley, in all agricultural and urban areas from Olympia south to Vancouver, and any other similar lowlands in western Washington.  Peregrines are found in the major Puget Sound towns and cities (and their industrial waterfronts), including Centralia/Chehalis, Kelso/Longview, Vancouver, Tacoma, Seattle, and others. You can also find them on the Samish Flats, in Grays Harbor, around Sequim, all areas that support significant prey populations in winter.	The Peregrine Falcon is the world's fastest bird. These aerial hunters are known for their steep power-dives, or stoops, sometimes reaching speeds up to 200 miles per hour.  They dive from above to grab their prey out of the air with their strong talons.  They also hunt closer to the ground, or from perches, overtaking their prey in flight.	The Peregrine Falcon's diet is composed mostly of other birds.  City-dwelling birds consume many Rock Doves (pigeons) and European Starlings, as well as other birds. Coastal birds prey on ducks and shorebirds, and in Washington, many colonial seabirds nesting on islands off the coast fall prey to Peregrine Falcons as well.	Records generalized to full township/ranges; true population density thus much thinner than symbolized. Seriously underrepresented in BBA due to inaccessibility of Cascade nest sites and non-disclosure policies designed to protect this recovering species. Nesting has expanded almost exponentially since Peregrine's removal from Endangered Species List in 1999, with pairs now inhabiting most western Washington cities. Nested in downtown Seattle for first time in 1994 and has returned each year since; Seattle population had risen to at least four pairs by 2004, after close of atlas period.	Like most birds of prey, Peregrine Falcons are generally monogamous, and may form long-term pair bonds.  They usually nest on a cliff near water, but as the species recovers and its range expands, they can also be found nesting on buildings and bridges.  They also sometimes nest on tree snags, or an abandoned nest of another large bird, although the Peregrines build no nest of their own.  Courtship includes ledge displays with the male and female bowing to each other. The female incubates 3-4 eggs for 28-32 days.  She continues to stay on the nest, brooding the young, for the first few weeks after they hatch.  During incubation and brooding, the male brings food to the nest.  Once the young no longer need brooding, the female also hunts.  The young start to fly at 39-49 days, with the males fledging before the females.	Northern breeders are often long-distance migrants, many traveling as far as South America.  In Washington, many are permanent residents, but while some remain on their territories year round, others may shift to areas that sustain large populations of wintering waterfowl or shorebirds, e.g., coastal estuaries.  Still others migrate south.  Some wintering birds may be migrants from farther north.  The full migration range of the species is not clearly known.	peregrine_falcon	PEFA			
201	22	Falco	rusticolus	Gyrfalcon	Rare winter resident.	LC	In some parts of the world, Gyrfalcons are threatened by the falconry trade. While populations in some regions are considered threatened, the Gyrfalcon appears stable in North America where its range is fairly remote from human disturbance. In Washington, numbers have increased in newly irrigated farmlands in the Columbia Basin, but this may be a result of newly created habitat rather than an increase in population.	The Gyrfalcon is the largest falcon in the world. Despite its size, it maintains a falcon-like profile with a long tail and long wings. Its wings are broader and more blunt at the tips than many other falcons. The plumage of the Gyrfalcon can take three main forms, white, gray, and dark, with many intermediate plumages. White adults have almost pure white breasts and bellies. The rest of their bodies are white mottled with brown. They have dark wingtips. Gray adults have gray upperparts with subtle darker mottling, and white underparts mottled with gray. Dark adults are dark-brownish overall above and brown streaked with white below. There is extreme sexual size dimorphism among Gyrfalcons, with males being only about 65% the size of females.		1	The Gyrfalcon's distribution is circumpolar. Gyrfalcons inhabit Arctic regions, from the northern coastal tundra to the edge of the boreal forest. They are often found in open areas with cliffs, and along rocky coasts and rivers. Wintering habitat tends to be more wide open.	Gyrfalcons are rare visitors to open Washington lowlands from mid-October through March. In western Washington, the Samish Flats (Skagit County) is a good place to see them.	Gyrfalcons are powerful flyers and pursue their prey in flight until overtaking them. They also locate prey while perched or in flight.	Large birds including ptarmigan and waterfowl are the most common prey item of the Gyrfalcon. They also eat rabbits, voles, small birds, and other mammals.		Monogamous pairs nest on the ground or on cliff ledges, sometimes in old nests of other birds. They do not build a nest of their own. Both adults incubate the 3-4 eggs for about 35 days, although the female incubates more than the male. The female broods the young for the first few weeks after hatching, while the male brings food. After the brooding period is over, the female also hunts. The young begin to fly at 45-50 days and become independent shortly thereafter.	Many Gyrfalcons remain in the far north year round, but the most northerly breeders are migratory. Immatures tend to move south in winter more than adults, and more of the birds seen in Washington are immature. The same may be true for females, as most of the birds banded in Washington (adult and immature) have been female.	gyrfalcon				
202	22	Falco	sparverius	American Kestrel	Fairly common resident.	LC	Recent counts suggest a declining population in the Northeast, but overall numbers appear to be healthy. The kestrels' readiness to use man-made nesting boxes bodes well for the species, since cavity-nesters are often limited by available natural cavities. There has been a significant decline (indicated by Breeding Bird Atlas data) in Washington from 1966-2002, probably due to a loss of nesting cavities. Another cause may be increased predation by Cooper's Hawks, a species that has rebounded in recent years.	 The American Kestrel is one of the few raptors in Washington with strongly sexually dimorphic plumage. It is the smallest and most delicate-looking of our falcons, with long wings and a long tail. Its head is blue, brown, and white. Males are brightly colored, with reddish-brown backs, slate-blue wings streaked with black, and tan breasts with black spots. The male's head is blue and brown, and both sexes have bold, black eyespots at the napes of their necks. Females are brown streaked with black on the back, and white streaked with brown on the breast.  The female has multiple bands on her tail. Both sexes have two bold, vertical face stripes.		1	American Kestrels are found in a wide variety of open habitats, among them agricultural areas, grasslands, sagebrush, shrub-steppe, steppe, and dry forest zones. They take advantage of clear-cuts and are typically found where open areas are combined with perching spots, such as trees, utility wires, and fence posts.	American Kestrels are common in open habitat at lower elevations in eastern Washington.  They are present but much less common in similar habitat in western Washington, especially in the north. They can also be seen at high elevations in open, rocky areas and in high meadows, up to about 6,000 feet. They can be found in the southern Puget Trough, the Upper Skagit River area, eastern King and Pierce Counties south to Trout Lake, and above the tree line along the crest of the Cascades. They are absent as a breeder on the Olympic Peninsula, except in the Sequim-Port Townsend area, although it is possible that they are breeding there and have not been reported.	Kestrels are often seen hovering in flight or perched upon wires in open areas. An American Kestrel can often be identified from afar by its characteristic tail-bob and its hunched silhouette.	The diet of the American Kestrel consists mainly of large insects such as grasshoppers, small mammals, small birds, and occasionally reptiles.	Common in Kittitas County, utilizing open habitats from steppe to dry-forest zones. Much less common locally in higher mountain forests up to tree line in openings including meadows, burns, and clearcuts, primarily on Kittitas County side of Cascade crest. Uncommon and local in agricultural areas, clearcuts, and remnant meadows throughout King and Island Counties, but apparently absent from Kitsap County. Kestrels use tree cavities, nest boxes, or cavities in cliffs for nesting, and may be limited by their availability.	American Kestrels nest primarily in cavities, usually 10-30 feet off the ground. In eastern Washington, they often use cliffs as nesting locations.  Old woodpecker holes, natural cavities, and man-made nesting boxes are all used. They will also nest in openings in man-made structures. The female lays 4 to 5 eggs, although this may vary. Pair bonds are monogamous, and both parents incubate for 29 to 31 days.  When the young hatch, the female broods them and the male brings food.	American Kestrels living in northern climates typically migrate south, while kestrels at southern and mid-latitudes do not typically migrate.  In Washington, they are present year round, although some eastern Washington birds leave in winter, and some wintering birds may be migrants from farther north.	american_kestrel	AMKE			
203	22	Falco	subbuteo	Eurasian Hobby		LC		One record, from Discovery Park, Seattle (King County), in October 2001.		1								eurasian_hobby				
204	22	Falco	tinnunculus	Eurasian Kestrel		LC		One bird discovered in late October 1999 on Samish Flats (Skagit County), seen irregularly into December.		1								eurasian_kestrel				
205	5	Fratercula	cirrhata	Tufted Puffin	Uncommon summer resident coast.	LC	Tufted Puffin colonies fluctuate in size annually, based in part upon food supply and climatic events, such as El Niño. The Tufted Puffin is one of the most abundant and conspicuous seabirds nesting in the north Pacific. Many California populations, however, have disappeared or significantly declined. In recent years, potentially serious declines have occurred in Washington as well. Oil spills and gill-nets are threats to Tufted Puffins, as is human disturbance. In Washington, most breeding colonies are protected as wildlife refuges or are inaccessible to humans. Populations of large gulls, which prey on young puffins, have been increasing in Washington, which may account for some of the recent decline in numbers.	Tufted Puffins are medium-sized, stocky seabirds with rounded heads. They are solid brown-black overall, except for distinctive facial coloration. The outer wings are wider than the inner wings, giving the outstretched wing a hand-like appearance. The feet and bill are orange. In breeding plumage, a Tufted Puffin has a white mask across its face, ending in a tuft of blonde feathers sweeping back from above the ear. The orange beak is very bright and accented with yellow at the base. Like other puffins, this species has a large, laterally compressed bill. The Tufted Puffin can be distinguished from other puffins by its dark belly.		1	Tufted Puffins can be found in many coastal habitats adjacent to the Washington coast and elsewhere in the northern Pacific, with the exception of estuaries. They breed in colonies on islands with steep, grassy slopes or on cliff tops. Winter habitat is well offshore, in mid-ocean.	From boats, Tufted Puffins are easier to see on the breeding colonies than many other alcids, as they are active during the day and can often be seen standing in front of their nesting burrows. However, although the Tufted Puffin is one of the most abundant seabirds breeding in Washington, it is among the least frequently seen, except from boats. During winter, these puffins are seen only occasionally near land. Most of the 29 known nesting colonies in Washington are on the outer coast. Jagged Island and Alexander Island hold the largest colonies, with 7,800 and 4,000 breeding birds, respectively. The five known inland colonies are located on Protection Island, Seal and Sail Rocks, Smith Island, Colville Island, and Bare Island.	Tufted Puffins are active at their nest colonies during the day and can often be seen sitting on rocks in an upright posture. Once airborne, they fly well but they need a running start to take flight. They dive and swim underwater, using their wings to paddle and their feet to steer their way through schools of small fish, which they catch in their bills. They can be seen carrying fish crosswise in their bills (sometimes 12 or more), which they take back to their young.	The diet of Tufted Puffins is mostly small fish. They also eat crustaceans, mollusks, and cephalopods.	Nests on coastal islands. Protection Island (Jefferson County) and Smith/Minor Islands (Island County) only known Washington nest sites away from outer coast. Severe decline of Washington populations in recent decades not adequately explained. Fifty-one birds censused at Smith/Minor Islands in 1992 (Smith et al. 1997); a few pairs at most still hanging on there as recently as 2003, beyond close of atlas period.	Tufted Puffins probably form long-term pair bonds. They nest in burrows at the edges of cliffs, on grassy slopes, or in natural crevices in rocks. The pair spends a great deal of time preparing the nest site, excavating the burrow with their bills and feet. The burrow is 2-7 feet long with a nest chamber at the end. This chamber may be lined with grass or feathers, or sometimes nothing at all. Digging the nest burrow is a time-consuming job, and the birds most likely do not breed in the season in which they dig the burrow, but wait until the following year. When the pair finally breeds, the female lays one egg, which both parents incubate for 6-1/2 to 7-1/2 weeks. Both parents care for the young for another 6-7 weeks, after which time the fledgling leaves its burrow at night and moves to sea. Most young birds are not yet capable of flight at this time, so they walk, or flutter to sea, without parental aid.	Migratory patterns are not well known, but Tufted Puffins are less likely to be seen near shore in winter than in the breeding season. They are probably the most pelagic of the alcids during their non-breeding season, with many birds wintering 60-120 miles offshore.	tufted_puffin				
206	5	Fratercula	corniculata	Horned Puffin		LC		Casual visitor to inland marine waters and along outer coast.		1								horned_puffin				
207	23	Fregata	magnificens	Magnificent Frigatebird		LC		The first state record is from the interior, at Umatilla NWR in July 1975. A second bird was seen at several Westside locations (Puget Sound, South Coast, mouth of Columbia River) for much of October 1988.		1								magnificent_frigatebird				
208	24	Fringilla	montifringilla	Brambling		LC		With a population numbering in the tens of millions, this nomadic finch breeds across northern Eurasia in subarctic woodlands and winters farther south in the temperate zone. It reaches Alaska nearly annually in variable numbers and is a casual, erratic winter visitor elsewhere in North America, especially in the West, with records as far south as California. Illustrative of the irruptive nature of this species&#8217; movements, Washington had eight records of Bramblings in three successive winters, 1990&#8211;1993, but has only three since then. The state&#8217;s 14 accepted records occurred from 6 November to 12 April; all but three were from the Westside, and most were from feeders. Birds typically remained for several days or even occasionally 2&#8211;4 months. The pattern of occurrence is similar in Oregon: eight records west of the Cascades and three east, date range 25 October&#8211;16 April. Idaho has three well-documented records and there are many from British Columbia.

The Brambling is a rather plump-looking, brownish finch, about the same size as a longspur. The tail is long and forked. The white rump and orange breast are key field marks. The bill is yellow outside the breeding season. The breeding-plumaged male has a black head and back, but this plumage is not normally seen in our wintering birds.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								brambling				
209	54	Fulica	americana	American Coot	Common winter. Fairly common breeder.	LC	American Coots are abundant in many areas and are often a pest on golf courses.	The American Coot is a medium-sized bird with a white bill, yellow legs, and lobed toes.  The body is dark gray to black with a blackish head and neck.  Some of the undertail coverts are white and visible, especially during display. Juveniles are paler and have greenish-gray legs.  The downy chick's plumage is a colorful orange on the head and neck.  In flight, coots may be distinguished by a white trailing edge on most of the wing.		1	American Coots are common at lower elevations in large freshwater ponds, lakes, and slow-moving rivers.  For nesting, they require tall marsh vegetation in shallow water.  Other times of the year, they will occasionally visit salt marshes and protected coastal bays.	In western Washington, coots are found in the Puget Trough and the Columbia River.  They are rare along the coast except in winter.  There are large numbers on Lake Washington near Seattle (King County).  They occur throughout eastern Washington wherever suitable bodies of water exist.	American Coots are noisy, gregarious members of the rail family.  They propel themselves through the water by pumping their heads back and forth.  Flocks often forage along the shore or on lawns.  They also dive for aquatic plants.  To become airborne, they must scramble across the water with wings flapping vigorously.  Coots will aggressively defend nesting territories, attacking each other with their feet.	Opportunistic feeders, coots eat mostly plant material but will also feed on small fish, tadpoles, snails, worms, insects, and eggs of other birds.	Common in lakes and large ponds in lowland King County; less common and local in ponds in vicinity of Ellensburg. Few records (none confirmed) for Kitsap and Island Counties. Water bodies must have emergent vegetation for nesting.	The nest, built by both sexes, is a floating platform made of stems of marsh plants.  It is concealed in vegetation and anchored to surrounding plants.  Females lay 6-11 eggs, and both sexes incubate.  The young are able to swim soon after hatching and follow the parents to be fed.  Pairs may have one to two broods per year.	In the east, American Coots are very rare nesters and only appear in fall and winter.  American Coots are permanent residents in the lowlands of eastern and western Washington.  From late August through December, local birds and migrants often congregate on large bodies of water.  Wintering flocks may be found in bays along the coast.  Birds return to breeding areas in March and April.	american_coot	AMCO			
210	50	Fulmarus	glacialis	Northern Fulmar	Fairly common pelagic.	LC	Populations in the Atlantic Ocean have experienced dramatic increases in recent decades. In the Pacific, several new colonies have been established since 1970, although there is no indication of dramatic increases in the Pacific comparable to those in the Atlantic. The commercial fishing industry is a major factor in the population of Northern Fulmars, providing them with most of their food. Large aggregations of birds can be found behind fishing boats, feeding on offal. While Northern Fulmars are not currently threatened, as colony nesters with high density in a few small areas, they are at potential risk if that habitat is degraded.	The Northern Fulmar is similar in appearance to a gull but stockier, with a thick neck, and more rounded wings and tail. The Northern Fulmar varies in color from mostly white, to gray and white like many gulls, to an overall gray-brown, with every possible shade in between.		1	Found in the cold waters of the open ocean, Northern Fulmars breed on steep sea cliffs on islands or mainland promontories. They use cliffs farther north than do most high-Arctic seabird species, often crossing ice-covered water to get to their breeding sites.	Northern Fulmars are commonly found offshore year round, but their numbers vary from year to year. Concentrations of birds can be found at upwellings along the outer continental shelf. The best way to see Northern Fulmars in Washington is on boat trips, although they can sometimes be seen from the north jetty at the mouth of the Columbia River (Pacific County), and from shore during fall migration or following a Pacific storm.	Although the Northern Fulmar appears gull-like at first glance, its flight behavior is quite different. Stiff-winged glides and quick wing-beats are characteristic of its flight. When feeding on the surface of the water, the Northern Fulmar grabs prey at or just below the water's surface. It also dives into the water and propels itself using its feet and wings.	The diet of the Northern Fulmar is varied, consisting of crustaceans, fish, small squid, and jellyfish. Fulmars commonly follow fishing boats and feed off the fish waste thrown from the boats.		Colonial breeders that nest on open sea cliffs, Northern Fulmars breed mainly in high-Arctic Canada and on islands in the Bering Sea. These birds are slow to mature and do not start breeding until they are 8-10 years old. Unlike many of the other members of this family, they are active around their nesting colonies during the day. The nest is located on the ledge of a cliff or in a hollow on a bank or slope. When nesting on a rock ledge, the fulmars do not build a nest, but when they nest on a bank or slope, they make a shallow scrape, occasionally lined with small stones.  The female lays one egg, and both parents incubate for about 7 weeks. Once the egg hatches, both parents feed the chick by regurgitation. The chick takes flight for the first time at the age of about seven weeks.	In winter, some birds remain as far north as there is open water, while others move south as far as southern California.  Numbers of fulmars also spend the summer south of the breeding grounds.	northern_fulmar				
211	57	Gallinago	delicata	Wilson's Snipe	Fairly common resident. Breeds mostly east.	LC	Both the Christmas Bird Count and the Breeding Bird Survey in Washington have indicated that Washington's Wilson's Snipe population is in decline. This species is difficult to survey, however, and these numbers may not reflect the actual population.  The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the current population at 26,750,000 worldwide and 2,000,000 in North America, although the North American form is often considered to be a separate species. The destruction of wetlands continues to reduce available habitat. Wilson's Snipe is a game bird in Washington. Annual harvest rates vary considerably throughout the state and have ranged from 879 to 164,595 birds taken statewide within the past ten years.	Wilson's Snipe is a rather chunky shorebird, with a short neck and short legs.  Its straight bill is very long.  It is colored cryptically in mottled brown and black, with prominent light buffy longitudinal stripes on both its head and back. Its flanks are heavily barred, and its tail, barely visible when the bird is on the ground, is a rusty orange.  Males, females, and juveniles have virtually the same appearance, and there is no seasonal variation in plumage.		1	Wilson's Snipe breeds in lowland, freshwater marshes and wet meadows with emergent vegetation, especially sedge meadows.  During migration and winter, snipes can also be found in salt marshes, estuaries, and other mucky areas.	In western Washington, Wilson's Snipes are uncommon and local and, though most are resident birds, breeding records are rare. In eastern Washington, Wilson's Snipe is a common breeding bird and may be found at all elevations where there is appropriate wetland habitat. Most eastern Washington snipes are short distance migrants, leaving by mid-October, but a few usually remain in eastern Washington throughout the winter. Migrants return in April.	Wilson's Snipes are relatively solitary, but may form flocks. They move slowly through vegetation, probing deep in the mud with a repetitive up-and-down 'sewing-machine' motion.  They are best seen during the breeding season when males sing from the top of perches such as fenceposts.  When snipes are approached, they often burst away in a zigzag escape flight.  One of the most distinctive sounds of Wilson's Snipe is a winnowing sound made by air rushing through its stiff outer tail feathers as it dives from high in its display flight.	Wilson's Snipes eat insects, earthworms, and other creatures that burrow in wet soil.  They also eat leaves and seeds.	Common in wet meadows and pastures in Kittitas Valley. Uncommon in montane meadows and marshes on both sides of Cascade crest. Uncommon to rare in wet marshes and pastures in Puget Trough lowlands, where perhaps declining. Needs emergent vegetation for nesting.	Males arrive on the breeding grounds 10 to 14 days before females. They establish territories and, once they arrive, attract females with their dramatic flight displays.  Females build their nests on grass or sedge hummocks.  The nest is a shallow depression lined with moss, leaves, and grass, sometimes with plants from above woven in a canopy.  The female lays 4 eggs and incubates them by herself for 18 to 20 days.  The young leave the nest shortly after hatching, and both parents tend the brood, often splitting the group and each taking one or two young.  The parents feed the young at first, although the young start to probe for their own food at about six days.  By ten days of age, they find most of their own food.  The parents continue to supplement their diet until they become independent (18 to 20 days).	Wilson's Snipes are found throughout the US and are partially migratory. Some move north into Canada, Alaska, and the northern US tier and some winter in the central and southern US, Mexico, and Central America. (But see When and Where To Find in Washington below.)	wilsons_snipe	WISN			
212	25	Gavia	adamsii	Yellow-billed Loon	Rare winter and migrant.	NT	No conservation measures have yet been taken solely on behalf of this species. Yellow-billed Loons frequently drown in fishing nets and traps, and have been threatened by oil spills in their migratory and winter habitat. Disruption by oil field exploration and development are significant potential threats in their breeding habitat. Tundra habitat where Yellow-billed Loons breed is highly sensitive and slow to rebound to disturbance, so protection of this habitat is important to their population.	The largest member of the loon family, the Yellow-billed Loon is larger and heavier than the Common Loon, which it resembles. Its creamy yellow bill is angled up at the end. Breeding and non-breeding plumages are similar to those of the Common Loon. The size and the yellow bill are the most reliable distinguishing features. In non-breeding plumage, identification is difficult. Consult a good field guide.		1	Found farther north than the Common Loon, Yellow-billed Loons nest on large lakes in the high arctic tundra. In the winter, they spend time on coastal waters in bays and inlets, and among island groups.	Yellow-billed Loons occur only in small numbers south of Canada. In Washington, they are rare winter residents on inland marine waters and occasionally on the coast. Within the last twenty years, they have been discovered wintering on large man-made reservoirs in eastern Washington. These recent reports are more likely due to better identification techniques rather than to an actual expansion of range.	During the breeding season, Yellow-billed Loons are strongly territorial, excluding other loons and all other diving waterfowl from their territories. They form loose flocks during migration and occasionally on their wintering grounds.	Their diet is not well known, but most likely consists primarily of small to medium-sized fish, crustaceans, mollusks, and other aquatic creatures.		The male appears to select the site, and both parents build the nest, a mound of muddy tundra vegetation with a depression at the center. Built on an island or on a mainland shore, the nest is partially hidden by surrounding vegetation and is often reused from year to year. The female lays two eggs, and both parents incubate. The young leave the nest one or two days after hatching and sometimes ride on their parents' backs. Both parents tend and feed the young and aggressively defend them.	Yellow-billed Loons migrate singly, in pairs, or in loose flocks. Mid-May to mid-June are the peaks of migration in the spring; fall peaks are from September to mid-October. They fly low over the water, along the coasts or up to more than a mile offshore.	yellow-billed_loon				
213	25	Gavia	arctica	Arctic Loon	Accidental visitor	LC		In 1985 the American Ornithologists&#8217; Union split the species formerly known as Arctic Loon <I>(Gavia arctica)</I> into two separate species, with the Old World form retaining the former name and the form breeding in North America renamed Pacific Loon <I>(Gavia pacifica)</I>. The Arctic Loon as newly redefined breeds across northern Eurasia, with a small population in western Alaska, and winters coastally as far south as China and the Mediterranean. While Pacific Loon is a common winter visitor in the Pacific Northwest, the Arctic Loon was not known to occur in the region prior to the split. The two species are very similar; nonetheless birders soon learned how to tell them apart, and Arctic Loons began appearing in Northwest waters, albeit in tiny numbers.

The most prominent field mark is the large, arching, white panel on the rear flanks, which is actually the white feathering of the thigh. This feather tract is dark in Pacific Loon, with the result that this species in normal resting posture does not have the flank patch. However, <I>all</I> species of loons may occasionally show extensive white on the flanks&#8212;for example, when birds roll over in the water to preen, exposing the white underparts&#8212;so this feature needs to be carefully assessed. Other corroborating characteristics (compared to Pacific Loon) are the Arctic&#8217;s somewhat larger size, thicker neck, larger bill with a slightly uptilted appearance, and more squared-off, flat-topped head.

The first Washington record was a bird on the Columbia River behind Priest Rapids Dam (Grant and Yakima counties), January&#8211;April 2000. Winter 2000&#8211;2001 brought several sightings on inland marine waters (Kitsap, Snohomish, and Clallam counties), representing at least two and possibly four or more birds. Oregon has two accepted records from the coast, and there is at least one published record from British Columbia.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								arctic_loon				
214	25	Gavia	immer	Common Loon	Common winter. Uncommon inland breeder.	LC	It is not known if the population of Common Loons in Washington is increasing, stable, or decreasing. Common Loons have declined in Washington in the last century, but there are no good data on their historic distribution in the state. Records of known nesting have increased in the past 15 years, but this may be due to increased sampling efforts. Because there are known threats and the species is recognized as vulnerable, Common Loons are classified as a state 'sensitive species' by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. The Gap Analysis Project also lists it as a species at risk. Pesticides, mercury contamination, and lead poisoning are all potential threats. Oils spills are also a threat, especially since loons dive rather than fly when they encounter oil slicks. Common Loons avoid densely populated areas, thus development of lakes and the resulting increase in boat traffic have resulted in a decrease in available habitat. Jet skis are a major disturbance to loons in that they are fast, loud, and can maneuver in shallow areas where loons nest. The decline of Common Loons continent-wide has aroused extensive public concern and action, and breeding conservation programs are in effect over much of their range. Many populations have responded to this effort. In Washington, there are 20 confirmed Common Loon nesting locations, and 8-10 nests were found each year in the 1990s. Common Loons do not breed until they are 5 years old, and often not until 7 or older. This delayed breeding results in low productivity, making it harder for the population to rebound from declines.	Common Loons are large water birds with thick necks and sharp bills. In breeding plumage, both sexes have striking black heads with white collars, white breasts, and black backs with white checkering. Adults in non-breeding plumage are brownish gray with white throats and breasts, partial white collars, and white around the eyes. Under-parts are white in all plumages. Juvenile plumage is similar to non-breeding.		1	In the breeding season, Common Loons can be found on large secluded lakes (at least 49 acres in size) with plenty of room for takeoff, deep inlets and bays, and a good supply of small fish. These lakes can be in forested areas in mountains or lowlands. Islands, logs, and floating debris attract nesting loons. In winter, Common Loons are usually found on salt water, typically in shallow areas close to shore. They occasionally winter on fresh water.	In winter, Common Loons can commonly be found on marine bays and inlets along the coast. They can also be found on nearby fresh water, albeit less frequently. During migration they are numerous on Puget Sound, Hood Canal, and Willapa Bay. They can also be found on large bodies of water in eastern Washington during migration, and in smaller numbers in winter. Common Loons have nested recently on lakes and reservoirs in Ferry, Okanogan, Douglas, Chelan, Whatcom, and King Counties. Non-breeding adults can be found in the summer in the north Puget Sound area, on the outer coast, and on lakes and reservoirs of Central Washington.	In winter, Common Loons are solitary while feeding, but they congregate in loose flocks at night. Before diving, they sometimes swim along the surface with heads partly submerged, looking for prey. When swimming under water, they use only their feet for propulsion.	Common Loons generally eat small fish up to 10 long, and also take crustaceans, mollusks, aquatic insects, leeches, and frogs. They may also occasionally eat aquatic plants. They swallow small prey under water and bring larger prey to the surface.	Uncommon west of Cascade crest on water-supply reservoirs in Tolt, Cedar, and Green River watersheds, on Calligan Lake, and perhaps also on a few smaller natural lakes scattered across Cascade foothills. All BBA nesting reports come from areas with limited public access, indicating that nesting not compatible with recreational boating or residential development. Absence of nesting reports east of Cascade crest on large reservoirs of Yakima River system may result from intensity of recreational use plus dramatic variation in summer lake levels due to irrigation draw-down.	The male and female build the nest very near the water, on the shore or on a small island. The nest, a mound of grasses, twigs, and reeds, is partly hidden by surrounding vegetation, and is often reused from year to year.  Common Loons will also use man-made floating nest-sites. The female lays two eggs, and both parents incubate. The young leave the nest only a few days after hatching and can dive and swim underwater at 2-3 days of age. Both parents continue to feed and tend the young, which sometimes ride on their backs.	Common Loons are medium-distance migrants. They migrate singly or in small flocks, just offshore low over the water. Over land, they fly higher. Peaks for the fall migration are from late August to late November. In the spring, peaks are from late April to early May.	common_loon	COLO			
215	25	Gavia	pacifica	Pacific Loon	Common winter west. Uncommon east.	LC	Numbers appear to be stable, but Pacific Loons are vulnerable to pollution in offshore wintering areas, and to the destruction of habitat in their far-northern breeding grounds.	Formerly considered a subspecies of the Arctic Loon, the Pacific Loon is now classified as a full species. It has a smoothly rounded head and neck and a straight bill. In breeding plumage, the top of the head and back of the neck are pale gray, lighter than the face. The body is black with white markings. Non-breeding plumage is dull black-brown, duller black on the back, and dark brown on the sides. Chins, throats, and breasts are all white, with a dark necklace at the top of the throat. The back of the head is gray, much darker than in breeding plumage.		1	Pacific Loons winter on the Pacific Coast, spending most of the winter on open water, farther from shore than other loon species. In summer, they nest on large, deep tundra lakes in the far north.	During winter, Pacific Loons can be found off the coast and in inland marine waters, such as the Strait of Juan de Fuca.  They are also a common sight during spring and fall migration. September through June is the best time of year to see Pacific Loons in Washington, with numbers peaking during migration in October and again in late May. In summer, non-breeding individuals are occasionally seen in marine waters of western Washington, and rarely, especially during fall migration, on large bodies of water east of the Cascades.	The most gregarious of the loons, Pacific Loons can be found in flocks of several thousand when food is abundant. They repeatedly dip their heads into the water looking for prey before diving. During the breeding season, they aggressively defend their territories.	Diet varies with season. When they are on the ocean, they mostly eat small fish. In other habitats, they also eat crustaceans, insects, and other aquatic creatures.		Both sexes build a nest on the shore of the mainland, or on an island. They pull up a heap of vegetation from around the nest site and arrange it into a pile with mud. Occasionally the nests are floating. Both adults incubate the two eggs. Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest, although for a few days they return periodically to sleep. Both parents feed the young.	Migration is thought to be coastal, although they have been sighted inland during migration as well. Migrants may travel in flocks several miles offshore, where they fly low over the water.	pacific_loon	PALO			
216	25	Gavia	stellata	Red-throated Loon	Common winter west, Rare migrant east	LC	The population of Red-throated Loons in Alaska has declined 53% in the last 20 years. Oil spills and habitat loss are major threats. Habitat loss in the far north is a significant risk factor because such areas are slow to rebound. These birds use marine waters year round, which makes them vulnerable to oil spills in all seasons.	The Red-throated Loon is the smallest and most slender of the loons. It has a thin bill that points slightly upward. In breeding plumage, it has a blackish-brown back, a gray head and neck, and a deep red throat. In non-breeding plumage, it has a gray back speckled with white, giving the bird an overall light gray appearance. The throat and face are white, with the white on the face extending above the eyes; the crown of the head is dark. Juveniles are brownish-gray. Under-parts are white in all plumages.		1	Red-throated Loons nest in small ponds in the tundra near larger lakes or coastlines. In winter they spend most of their time on protected ocean bays and large estuaries, although they have been known to winter on large lakes as well. They can often be found foraging on submerged mudflats and are generally found in shallower, more protected water than other loons, usually within a mile of the coast.	During winter, Red-throated Loons are fairly common on the inshore waters of the enclosed bays of Puget Sound. They can also be found at the mouths of large rivers. Migrant birds can be found at these same locations in both spring and fall, and occasionally, non-breeders are found there in summer. The spring migration peaks in late April to early May, with flocks gathering off the Washington coast. In fall, the migration peak is in late September and October. Red-throated Loons have bred as far south as Vancouver Island, so a Red-throated Loon breeding in Washington is a possibility, although there are no confirmed records for the state at this time.	Unlike other loons, Red-throated Loons can take off directly from land. They can also take off from water without a running start, which enables them to take advantage of smaller bodies of water. During the winter, they are gregarious, feeding in small groups. This is the only loon that regularly forages away from its nesting pond during the breeding season.	During both the breeding and non-breeding seasons, Red-throated Loons eat mostly marine fish. Crustaceans, mollusks, and other aquatic creatures round out the diet.		Red-throated Loons breed farther north than any other loon. They nest on shore or in shallow water, often on islands. Both sexes help build the nest, which is a simple heap of vegetation on a hummock. Both parents incubate the two eggs. The young leave the nest one day after hatching, and both parents continue to tend and feed the young.	Medium-distance migrants, Red-throated Loons usually migrate singly, or occasionally in small groups. They travel along the coast a mile or so offshore.	red-throated_loon	RTLO			
217	41	Geothlypis	trichas	Common Yellowthroat	Common summer resident, mostly west.	LC	Although the destruction of wetlands has eliminated habitat in many areas, Common Yellowthroats are one of the most widely distributed and common warblers in North America. Populations in the Pacific Northwest have actually increased in recent years, and Breeding Bird Survey data show a significant increase in Washington since 1966. Common Yellowthroats are common hosts for parasitic Brown-headed Cowbirds, but this does not appear to be a major factor in the Northwest.	The Common Yellowthroat male has a distinctive black mask with a white border at the top and a bright yellow throat that extends into its breast. It is yellow below to the undertail coverts, with a solid olive back. The female lacks the facial markings and is buff below, but has the same yellow throat and undertail coverts as the male. The juvenile looks like the female, but without the yellow throat, although the juvenile male shows a faint blackish mask.		1	Throughout much of North America, Common Yellowthroats are typical inhabitants of cattail marshes and other wetlands with dense, low growth. In western Washington, they are not as closely tied to cattail marshes as in other parts of their range; in eastern Washington, they are almost always in cattails. They are most common in wet, shrubby, lowland thickets, often frequenting introduced plants such as Scots broom and reed canary grass.	Two subspecies of Common Yellowthroat breed in Washington; the populations are divided by the Cascade Mountains. Common Yellowthroats are common and widespread in lowland wetlands throughout western Washington from early April to late September. They are extremely rare in winter in western Washington. East of the Cascades, they are fairly common, but very local, from early May to the end of August, with some birds lingering through September. In eastern Washington, Common Yellowthroats are typically found in wetlands within forested zones and are less common in the hottest parts of the Columbia Basin.	Like many birds that inhabit dense undergrowth, Common Yellowthroats sometimes cock their tails up. They forage low, mostly gleaning prey from the foliage, but sometimes flying out to catch aerial prey, or forage on the ground. During the breeding season, males often perch on a tall stalk to sing, and flick their wings and tails to attract females.	Common Yellowthroats eat insects and other small invertebrates. They also occasionally eat seeds.	Common in open wetlands at lower elevations in King, Kitsap, and Island Counties, but also penetrates to higher elevation along streams in eastern King County, occasionally reaching highest passes. Uncommon and local breeder at moderate elevation in Kittitas County in ponds and wetlands along Yakima River and tributaries from vicinity of Thorp west to Keechelus Lake, and north along Cle Elum River to fairly high elevation. Prefers cattail habitat, but in western counties may use drier, open habitats dominated by invasive plants. Absent from Columbia Plateau, where little, if any, appropriate habitat occurs.	Common Yellowthroats are primarily monogamous. Pairs form shortly after the females arrive on the breeding grounds, about a week after the males. The female selects the nest site and builds the nest, which is usually within three feet of the ground in a shrub, or on the ground in a grass or weed tussock. The nest is a loose, bulky cup, sometimes with a partial roof, made of weeds, grass, sedge, and leaves, lined with fine bark, grass, and hair. The female incubates 3 to 5 eggs for 12 days. The male does not incubate the eggs, but brings food to the female while she is on the nest. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest 8 to 10 days after hatching. The parents continue to feed the young for at least two weeks following fledging. Most pairs raise two broods a season. When the first brood fledges, the female starts the second brood and the male feeds the fledglings.	Common Yellowthroat migration is spread out over an extended period in both the spring and fall. Some populations are non-migratory, although Washington's breeders leave the state to winter in Mexico and Central America. They generally migrate at night.	common_yellowthroat	COYE			
218	60	Glaucidium	gnoma	Northern Pygmy-Owl	Uncommon resident.	LC	Northern Pygmy-Owls are uncommon but widespread.  There is no evidence of range-wide decline.  There is little information as to their abundance in Washington, which may reflect either a small population, a low rate of detection, or both.  As long as some large nesting trees are left standing, Northern Pygmy-Owls probably benefit from logging, as they are well adapted to using a combination of young forests and open areas.   There are two subspecies in Washington, one on each side of the Cascades.	The Northern Pygmy-Owl is a small, long-tailed owl, with yellow eyes and feet.  It has only small and inconspicuous ear-tufts, which are seldom seen in the field. Its plumage is reddish-brown spotted with white.  Like all members of its genus, it has false eye-spots, black outlined in white, on the back of its neck.  Its belly is white, with dark streaks. It usually perches in a diagonal rather than upright position.		1	Northern Pygmy-Owls breed in coniferous and mixed woodlands. They prefer areas with scattered openings rather than large tracts of unbroken forest.	Northern Pygmy-Owls are fairly common year round in Washington, in forested areas in and on both sides of the Cascades.  They avoid urbanized areas and are more common east of the Cascades.  They are often seen east of the Cascades in winter at forest edges up to the snow line.	While they are most active at dawn and dusk, Northern Pygmy-Owls are often seen during the day, especially when it is overcast.  They usually perch in the open at the very top of a conifer or snag or in a small tree.  When perched, they commonly bob their heads and flick their tails up and down, often holding their tails to one side.  Northern Pygmy-Owls are aggressive hunters, fast enough to chase prey in flight.  Small songbirds often mob them, and imitating the call of a Northern Pygmy-Owl will often bring songbirds close in for observation.	Northern Pygmy-Owls eat rodents, large insects, and small birds, which make up to one third of their diet in some places.	Fairly common locally in relatively undisturbed conifer-dominated forests in King, Kitsap, and Kittitas Counties. Recorded only away from urban and developed suburban areas, but possibly under-recorded due to crepuscular, sometimes secretive habits. Apparently absent from Island County. Records concentrated in forest zones at moderate elevation on both sides of Cascade crest. May move upslope to tree line in late summer and downslope in fall and winter. Seems to require good-quality forest with good-sized trees, perhaps to provide adequate nesting cavities.	Monogamous pairs form in the spring.  Northern Pygmy-Owls nest in natural tree cavities or old woodpecker holes.  They do not add nest material.  The female incubates 3 to 4 eggs for about 28 days, waiting for all the eggs to be laid before beginning incubation, a behavior unique among North American owls.  While she is brooding, the male brings her food.  The female stays on the nest and broods the young for the first week or so after they hatch. During this time, the male continues to bring food to the nest. The young begin to fly at 27 to 28 days.	While Northern Pygmy-Owls do not undertake a regular seasonal migration, birds at higher altitudes may wander down-slope in fall and winter, as they follow the movement of their prey.  During this time they may be seen at the lower edges of forests, along streams in the shrub-steppe region, and even in hay fields and pastures.	northern_pygmy-owl				
219	26	Grus	canadensis	Sandhill Crane	Common migrant. Winter southwest. Rare breeder east.	LC	Although with over 500,000 birds the Sandhill Crane is the most abundant crane worldwide, it is an endangered species in Washington. Its low numbers in the state, limited distribution, and low reproduction rate, and the loss of suitable crane habitat put it at significant risk of extirpation in the state. As an added risk, a large percentage of its wintering habitat is privately owned and thus subject to alteration without concern for endangered species.  The small population of the Sandhill Cranes that breed in Washington are members of the Greater Sandhill Crane subspecies, which numbers only 70-80,000 birds throughout its entire range.
     Sandhill Cranes formerly bred commonly in wetlands on both sides of the Cascade Crest but now breed in only two or three places in eastern Washington. They are limited by the availability of large tracts of undisturbed marsh and meadow for nesting and feeding, with adequate water levels during the nesting period. Sandhill Cranes are extremely wary, requiring isolated sites with good cover during the nesting period. When repeatedly disturbed by pedestrians, construction, low-flying aircraft, vehicles, or predators, they desert their nests. For Sandhill Cranes to survive in Washington, breeding, migration, and wintering habitats all need to be protected and enhanced. It is crucial that the loss and degradation of wetlands in Sandhill Crane nesting habitat is stopped, and in some cases, creation of additional habitat should be considered. Wetlands within two miles of agricultural areas providing grain are ideal roosting areas.	Sandhill Cranes are big birds, with long legs and necks, long pointed beaks, and wingspans which can be over six feet. Adults are gray with red crowns. Juveniles are gray, washed with brown. During the breeding season, the gray plumage of the adults is often stained brown with mud. A bustle, which covers the short tail, is composed of long, drooping inner wing feathers (tertials and inner secondaries.)		1	Sandhill Cranes live in wet meadows and grasslands, and they feed in grain fields and pastures. In Washington, they nest in wetlands in areas that are surrounded by Lodgepole Pine, Ponderosa Pine, Grand Fir, or Douglas Fir forests. Emergent vegetation is a key component of their preferred nesting areas. During migration and in winter they live in more open prairie, agricultural fields, and river valleys. Sandhill Cranes prefer to live in habitats where they have clear views of their surroundings.	There are two confirmed nesting spots for Sandhill Cranes in Washington, one at Conboy Lake National Wildlife Refuge (Klickitat County) and the other near Signal Peak on the Yakama Indian Reservation (Yakima County). Cranes were first reported at Conboy in 1975, when a single pair nested. Subsequently, a single pair was reported at Conboy each year until 1988, but from 1988 until 1996, 2-9 pairs nested there each year. In 1994 and 1995, another single pair of cranes was found nesting on the Yakima Indian Reservation, and in 1996, a second pair joined them. Sandhill Cranes were also recorded in June, 1996 at Atkins Lake in Douglas County, which may indicate a third breeding area, although breeding in this area was not confirmed. During migration, however, large numbers of Sandhill Cranes can be seen at stopover sites in the Columbia Basin. Sandhill Cranes migrating to northwestern Canada and Alaska stop in eastern Washington near Othello (Adams County) and west to Royal City (Grant County), with peak numbers reaching 15,000 in early April. After refueling, they often also stop near Mansfield (Douglas County) before continuing north through the Okanogan Valley. Some cranes migrate on the west side of the Cascades, moving north through the Puget Trough or along the coast. In the fall, cranes use similar routes to make their way south. Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge and nearby agricultural fields in southwest Washington are regular wintering spots.	During the breeding season, Sandhill Cranes paint themselves by preening mud, which serves as camouflage, into their feathers. The courtship rituals of cranes are elaborate: paired birds spread their wings and leap repeatedly into the air while calling. Pairs return to the same nesting territories year after year and sometimes use the same nest repeatedly. The young learn migratory routes from adults; without this modeling, they do not migrate.	Sandhill Cranes are omnivores; their diet varies by location and season. They eat insects, rodents, snails, small reptiles and amphibians, nestling birds, the roots of aquatic plants, tubers, berries, seeds, and grains.		Nests are built in emergent vegetation in shallow water or close to water. Both parents build the nest, a mound of plant material pulled up from around the site and anchored to surrounding vegetation. Both parents incubate the two eggs. The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and follow their parents out into the marsh. At first, both parents feed the young, but the young quickly learn to feed themselves. They remain with their parents for their first nine to ten months.	There are six recognized subspecies of Sandhill Cranes. Of these, half are migratory. The migratory cranes travel long distances, using routes learned from adults. During this migration they congregate at major stopover spots. The subspecies of Sandhill Crane seen in Washington are migratory. Most of the cranes that breed in Washington are members of the Central Valley population of the Greater Sandhill Crane subspecies, and they winter in the Central Valley of California. Members of the other two migratory subspecies, Lesser Sandhill Crane and Canadian Sandhill Crane, breed to our north and only migrate through Washington. Breeding Sandhill Cranes arrive at their nesting grounds in early March and leave for California between late September and mid-October.	sandhill_crane				
220	13	Gymnogyps	californianus	California Condor		CR		Large numbers of condors once came to the Columbia River to feast on salmon carcasses in fall spawning season. The last record is from 1897.		1								california_condor				
221	18	Gymnorhinus	cyanocephalus	Pinyon Jay		VU		Two old records of errant flocks in Yakima and Klickitat Counties.		1								pinyon_jay				
222	27	Haematopus	bachmani	Black Oystercatcher	Uncommon coastal resident.	LC	The Washington population is estimated to be roughly 400 birds. This number is probably not significantly different from the historical population, as these birds require fairly specialized habitat, which is not evenly distributed. Oystercatchers are highly vulnerable to human disturbance, oil spills, and pollution of the intertidal zone. Numbers of Black Oystercatchers on the outer coast may be higher than in the past, in part due to decreased human disturbance resulting from lighthouse automation. Numbers in inland areas, however, have declined in response to increased human activity. The Northern Pacific Coast Regional Shorebird Management Plan has identified the Black Oystercatcher as a regional species of high concern.	The Black Oystercatcher is a distinctive, crow-sized, short-tailed, all-black shorebird.  It has pale pinkish legs and a long, bright reddish-orange bill and eye-ring.		1	Black Oystercatchers are found along rocky shorelines in all seasons.	The Black Oystercatcher is seen year round in appropriate habitat along most of the outer coast of Washington, but seen only occasionally from Point Grenville, south to the mouth of the Columbia River. It can also be seen in the San Juan Islands and along the coast of Puget Sound, south to Whidbey Island (Island County). It is absent in the southern Puget Sound and in the Strait of Juan de Fuca, from the mouth of the Elwha River (Clallam County) to Protection Island (Jefferson County), due to lack of appropriate habitat. During the breeding season, Black Oystercatchers nest in about 100 different locations. They are typically found on the same islands and rocks as colonial nesting species, although they are not colonial nesters themselves. In winter, the entire population in the San Juan Islands may gather in three or four large flocks.	Black Oystercatchers are usually seen in pairs or in small to medium-sized flocks, but may aggregate into larger flocks in sheltered areas.  They forage mostly during low tide, moving slowly and deliberately through the rocks in search of food.  When alarmed, they take flight with a loud, piercing whistling.	Mussels and limpets are their primary food, but Black Oystercatchers prey on a wide range of shellfish and other creatures found along the rocky shore. They locate open mussels and disable them with a quick jab to the adductor muscle. With the mussel stuck in the open position, the oystercatcher can pull out the contents with the tip of its chisel-like bill. Oystercatchers often forage in the wave zone, because mussels that are splashed by waves open more frequently.	In Washington, nests on rocky saltwater shore primarily in San Juan Islands and west locally through Strait of Juan de Fuca to outer coast. One confirmed nesting for our area, on Spy's Island at Deception Pass off northern tip of Whidbey Island; also found regularly along western Whidbey shoreline south to Partridge Point. Non-breeding stragglers occasionally reported farther south in Admiralty Inlet and Puget Sound.	Black Oystercatchers nest on non-forested islands with shell or gravel beaches, and will defend territories that encompass both nesting and feeding areas. Males and females appear to form long-term pair bonds, and the pair returns to the same territory year after year. Both male and female help build a small scrape on the ground, well above the high tide mark. The nest is sparsely lined with pebbles or shell pieces. The female lays 2-3 eggs, and both the male and the female incubate for about 3½ -4 weeks. Unlike many other shorebirds, the parents bring food to the young for a prolonged period of time. At the age of about five weeks, the young can fly and begin to forage on their own, but are still provided with food by their parents.	While there is no regular migration, some movement is seen in the spring and fall.  They generally remain near their nesting areas.	black_oystercatcher				
223	1	Haliaeetus	leucocephalus	Bald Eagle	Common resident.	LC	The Bald Eagle formerly ranged from Alaska and Canada south into 45 of the 48 contiguous United States. Populations were drastically reduced in the early and middle 20th Century due in part to shooting, but mostly due to pesticides (especially DDT) that cause the thinning of eggshells and reduced productivity. After DDT was banned in the 1970s, the Bald Eagle made a dramatic comeback in many areas. Its range is still limited, but it continues to expand to areas with suitable habitat. In 1995, the US Fish and Wildlife Service downgraded the status of the Bald Eagle from endangered to threatened. It is also considered a threatened species by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. In Washington, there are currently more than 550 active Bald Eagle nests, including many in urban settings. Productivity rates are below target levels but are improving on the Hood Canal and the Lower Columbia River, perhaps due to the decrease in environmental contaminants. The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife is studying this and other potential impacts on Bald Eagles, including the effect of human disturbance in both the breeding and non-breeding seasons. The Bald Eagle's dramatic recovery has had unfortunate effects on Great Blue Herons, since Bald Eagles occasionally plunder the nests of the herons, taking both eggs and young, and causing the herons to abandon some colonies.	The mature Bald Eagle, our national emblem, is an easily recognizable and spectacular bird.  It has a dark brown body and wings and a white head and tail. Its legs and feet are bright yellow, as is its large, hooked bill. Its piercing eyes are light yellow. Females are larger than males, weigh from 10-14 pounds, and have a 6½- to 7-foot wingspan. Males usually weigh from 8-10 pounds and have a 6- to 6½-foot wingspan. Juveniles (one-year old birds) and sub-adults (birds up to four years of age) are brown, with varying degrees of white mottling below. Young eagles do not reach full adult plumage until they are 4-6 years old. Bald Eagles may live up to 40 years.		1	The Bald Eagle is found only in North America, generally in coastal areas or near large inland lakes and rivers that have abundant fish and shores with large trees.	Western Washington has one of largest concentrations of Bald Eagles in the contiguous United States. They are common breeders along salt and fresh water at lower elevations throughout western Washington, especially in the San Juans and other northern Puget Trough islands and along both the north and west coasts of the Olympic Peninsula. They are uncommon breeders along major rivers and lakes in eastern Washington. They will nest fairly close to people; in fact several pair nest within the Seattle city limits. In winter, they are common in many areas with open water, including estuaries, major lakes, and rivers, especially those with salmon runs. Bald Eagles are well known for their abundance during the winter months on the Skagit River (Skagit County).	Bald Eagles are usually seen soaring on flat wings, flying with strong, slow wing beats, or perching in trees adjacent to water. They are opportunistic feeders - scavengers at times, predators at others. When scavenging, they are often seen on the ground or on the bank of a river or other body of water. Sometimes they steal food from other raptors. When hunting, they swoop down to the water or ground with feet thrust forward to snatch their prey. The undersides of eagle's feet are rough, and keep the fish from slipping from the eagle's grasp.	Bald Eagles eat many fish, live fish that they snatch from the water and dead fish, especially spawned salmon, which they pick up from stream-sides. They also eat ducks and other water birds as well as small mammals. In the San Juan Islands, rabbits, hunted living or scavenged dead, are the main source of food. In many parts of Washington in winter, American Coots are an important part of the diet as well.	Common near large bodies of water at lower elevations in King, Kitsap, and Island Counties, including urban areas. Nests in vicinity of coastlines and major rivers, with highest densities in Island County. Rare in Kittitas County with two confirmed records at Cle Elum Lake. Increasing summer reports along Columbia River beyond close of atlas period may point to future breeding, although scarcity of large, live trees preferred for nesting may limit choice.	Bald Eagles build large stick nests called eyries in tall trees or on cliffs. They continue to build up the eyries year after year until they are massive, up to 9 feet in diameter and weighing up to 2,000 pounds. Bald Eagles do not breed until they are 4 to 6 years old, but when they pair for mating they tend to remain paired for life. The egg-laying season is generally late winter to early spring. In western Washington, sometime during the last days of February and the first days of March, the female lays 2 eggs. Both parents incubate the eggs for 34 to 36 days. For the first two weeks after the young hatch, one parent is with the chicks almost constantly. The young do not start to fly until they are 10 to 12 weeks old, and the parents continue to feed and defend them for another 2 to 3 months.	Many of the Bald Eagles that breed in Washington are permanent residents.  However some birds from western Washington leave the state in late summer and early fall and move north to exploit food sources such as salmon, then return by January to breed. Some birds that breed farther north winter in Washington.	bald_eagle	BAEA			
224	55	Himantopus	mexicanus	Black-necked Stilt	Fairly common summer east. Rare west.	LC	The first nesting record in Washington occurred in 1973, and it is thought that breeding Black-necked Stilts moved northward as a result of a drought in the southwestern states. Black-necked Stilts have since become established in Washington, numbers may be increasing, and their range expanding. The Black-necked Stilt's ability to take advantage of artificial habitat may counterbalance historic habitat loss. Failed reproduction due to selenium contamination of wetlands in the western United States is a concern. A subspecies in Hawaii, the Hawaiian Stilt, is federally endangered due to hunting, habitat loss, and introduced predators.	With its black and white plumage, long, thin red legs, and long neck, the Black-necked Stilt is both striking and delicate in appearance. It is a medium-sized shorebird with a black needle-like bill, black or dark brown upperparts, and a white breast. The iris is red, and there is a white spot above the eye. Breeding males have glossy black wings, back, and back of neck, and a pink tinge on the breast. Non-breeding males lack the glossiness and pink tinge. Adult females have a brown tinge to the back. Juveniles have brown upperparts with buff feather margins, and a white trailing edge to the wing in flight.		1	Black-necked Stilts are found on the margins of shallow inland ponds and lakes in open country. They are often associated with American Avocets, but will also use wetlands with more emergent vegetation such as flooded fields. During migration, Black-necked Stilts may visit coastal mud flats.	During the breeding season, Black-necked Stilts are scattered in small colonies from Potholes Reservoir in central Washington north to Okanogan County. They are occasionally seen in western Washington in spring (April to May), rarely in early August.	Black-necked Stilts are gregarious. They spread out while foraging and roost in small groups. Although during the breeding season and in winter, Black-necked Stilts are strongly territorial, the territories are aggregated, and adults will participate jointly in anti-predator displays; thus, there is some degree of coloniality. An anti-predator display called 'the popcorn display' consists of a group of adults encircling a ground predator and hopping side to side while flapping their wings. They forage visually by wading through the water and picking prey from at or near the surface. Black-necked Stilts often call loudly and incessantly when agitated.	Black-necked Stilts most often consume aquatic invertebrates. They also sometimes eat tadpoles, tiny fish, and seeds of aquatic plants.		Pairs form on wintering grounds, during migration, or on breeding grounds; pairs remain monogamous throughout the breeding season. Both sexes choose the nest site, which is often on a small island in the marsh. The nest, a shallow depression, is scraped by either sex while the other sex watches. Lining is added throughout incubation, especially in wetter spots where plant material is used to build up the nest. The female typically lays four eggs, and both sexes incubate and care for young. The precocial chicks are able to leave the nest within 1-2 hours of hatching. Family groups remain together well beyond the time when the young can fly. Juveniles gather in small groups prior to departure from breeding areas. Pairs normally have one brood per season.	Black-necked Stilts arrive on breeding grounds in Washington in April and stay as late as September or October. They winter in parts of California and the Gulf Coast, and throughout Mexico and Central and South America.	black-necked_stilt				
225	28	Hirundo	rustica	Barn Swallow	Common summer resident.	LC	The killing of Barn Swallows for their feathers was one of the issues that led to the founding of the Audubon Society and the passage of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.  These outlawed the killing of birds without the appropriate license and made it illegal to possess even a single feather of a protected bird. The Barn Swallow's close association with humans in Europe goes back over 2,000 years. In North America, the shift from natural to human-made nest sites was nearly complete by the middle of the 20th Century.  The Barn Swallow's range has expanded considerably in North America with European settlement, and Barn Swallows are widespread and abundant across their current range. Although they are still common in Washington, Breeding Bird Census data indicate that Barn Swallows have decreased significantly here since 1980.	Known in Eurasia simply as 'the swallow,' the Barn Swallow is a distinctive bird with bold plumage and a long, slender, deeply forked tail. Barn Swallows are deep blue above, with an orange-buff breast and belly. They have russet throats and forehead patches. The rest of the head is deep blue, extending in a line through the eye, giving the birds a masked appearance. Females are slightly duller and shorter-tailed than males. Juveniles look similar to adults, but have much shorter tails.		1	Barn Swallows need open areas to forage and suitable sites for nesting, now almost always buildings, bridges, or other man-made structures. They generally avoid unbroken forest and very dry areas. Their original habitat was most likely mountainous areas and seacoasts with caves, hollow trees, and rock crevices for nesting. Now that they have adapted to living with humans, they are found in agricultural areas, suburbs, and along highways--anywhere there are open areas and nesting structures, especially if water is close by.	Barn Swallows begin to arrive in mid- to late April and continue to arrive into May; most leave by mid-September. They are common at lower to moderate elevations throughout the state in residential and agricultural areas, but in migration they may be seen in the mountains. They have been seen in Washington in the winter, but very infrequently.	Barn Swallows can often be seen foraging for insects low over fields or water. In bad weather, they sometimes forage on the ground. They gather mud for their nests from mud puddles, although they do not raise their wings when they do this as Cliff Swallows do.	Barn Swallows eat mostly flying insects, especially flies, although they occasionally eat berries, seeds, and dead insects from the ground.	Common at low to moderate elevations throughout, but range also extends to higher montane sites with suitable structures for nesting such as ski lodges. Almost always uses man-made structures for nesting. Most common in agricultural or residential areas and requires open habitat for foraging. Absent from large expanse of forest zones in Kittitas County where predicted to occur by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	While several Barn Swallows may nest near each other, they do not form dense colonies. They are usually monogamous during the breeding season, but extra-pair copulations are common, and new pairs form each spring. Polygyny sometimes occurs, and helpers not only help build and guard the nest but also incubate the eggs and brood the young, although they generally do not feed the young. A few birds still nest in caves, but 99% of the breeding Barn Swallows in Washington now build their nests on eaves, bridges, docks, or other man-made structures with a ledge that can support the nest, a vertical wall to which it can be attached, and a roof. Both members of the pair build the nest--a mass of mud, straw, feathers, and sticks. Barn Swallow nests are relatively untidy. Both members of the pair incubate the four to five eggs for 12 to 17 days, and both feed the young. The young leave the nest 20 to 21 days after hatching.	Long-distance migrants, Barn Swallows congregate along canals or field edges before they migrate in flocks, mostly along river valleys, to Central and South America.	barn_swallow	BARS			
226	6	Histrionicus	histrionicus	Harlequin Duck	Fairly common coast. Uncommon breeder on rivers.	LC	While the population of Harlequin Ducks in the Pacific Northwest appears to be stable, much research is currently under way to get a better sense of how the species is faring. Harlequin Ducks are listed as a priority species by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. They are subject to many potential threats, including shoreline development, hunting, and fishing nets. Oil spills are also a potential threat, and as recently as 1998, Alaskan Harlequin Ducks were still exhibiting reduced survival rates as a result of the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill. In Washington, however, logging is probably the most significant threat. Logging activities remove suitable forests along streams and also can add silt and sediment to the streams, reducing the amount of prey. Because Harlequin Ducks take a number of years to reach maturity, they are slower to rebound from threats, and great care must be taken to prevent a negative impact on the population.	The distinctive Harlequin Duck is a small sea duck with a small bill, short neck, and long tail. Males in breeding plumage are unmistakable with their dark blue color, rufous sides and crown, and striking white patterning on the face, neck, sides, and back. In non-breeding plumage the males are brown with white on the face and a round white spot at each ear. A subtle white shoulder stripe and white on the wings distinguishes the male in non-breeding plumage from the juvenile and the female, which look similar.		1	Harlequin Ducks prefer turbulent water, both in their breeding habitat, which is along fast-moving mountain streams, and in their wintering habitat, which is along rocky coastlines. The mountain streams are usually at low to subalpine elevations within a closed forest canopy, and have midstream gravel bars or rocks for roosting. Coastal habitat is typically in the shallow, intertidal zones along rocky coastlines, where rough surf is the norm.	As a breeder, the Harlequin Duck is uncommon below 4,000 feet in the Cascade, Olympic, and Selkirk Mountains from mid-March through mid-August. They are rare in the Blue Mountains and southern Cascades. In winter they are common in saltwater habitat along rocky shorelines and jetties, more common in Puget Sound north of Seattle than south. They are most common along the outer coast of Whidbey Island. Another wintering site is at Rosario Beach at Deception Pass State Park on Fidalgo Island (Skagit County). They are also regularly seen at Birch Bay and Semiahmoo Spit (Whatcom County). In summer, they can sometimes be seen along the gravel bars of the Methow River south of Winthrop (Okanogan County).	Harlequin Ducks are well adapted to their harsh surroundings. They make their way against the current and easily climb up steep and slippery rocks, although many have been found with broken bones, presumably from being dashed against rocks in the rough surf. Like other diving ducks they forage under water, although in addition to diving they also walk along the bottom or dabble. When they find food at the bottom, they pry it open with their bills.	In coastal habitat, mollusks and crustaceans make up the bulk of the diet. Some small fish and marine worms are also eaten.  On rivers, aquatic insects are the main prey, especially larvae attached to rocks on the river bottom.	Uncommon in fast-moving streams at moderate elevations in mountains of eastern King and western Kittitas Counties. Generally breeds on rivers with closed forest canopies, situating nests on banks in dense cover, but may also use rock crevices and tree cavities. Often roosts on gravel bars in rivers during breeding season. Non-breeders and post-breeding males found by early summer along seacoast, or rarely in large lakes.	Most females first breed at the age of two, and males at the age of three, although breeding success for many birds remains low until they are five years old. Pairs form during winter and spring, and dissolve after the female begins incubation. At this time, the male leaves the female and the breeding territory. They reunite in the fall on the wintering grounds. The well-concealed nest is located close to a stream, on the ground, on a small cliff ledge, in a tree cavity, or in a stump. It is a shallow depression lined with vegetation and down. The female lays 5 to 7 eggs and incubates them for 27 to 30 days. The chicks leave the nest shortly after hatching, remain near the nesting area for a few weeks, and then move downstream. The female tends the young and leads them to feeding areas, and the young feed themselves. They can dive at a very young age, but find most of their food on the surface at first. It is not unusual to see combined broods tended by more than one female. The young can fly at about 5 to 6 weeks.	Short-distance migrants, Harlequin Ducks move from the coast inland and back again. When they migrate inland, they usually fly low, following the course of a river. Males leave the breeding area for molting areas in the Strait of Juan de Fuca and Puget Sound in late June or early July. Females and the young of the year leave the breeding grounds in August. Harlequin Duck migration often does not take the standard north-south pattern found in many birds; Harlequins wintering on the Pacific Coast and in Puget Sound may move south or west (to the Olympic Peninsula) to breed.	harlequin_duck	HADU			
227	32	Hydroprogne	caspia	Caspian Tern	Summer resident.	LC	Susceptible to disturbance at the nesting site and quick to abandon colonies when disturbed, Caspian Tern populations have declined in Europe and Africa to the point of extirpation in some areas. Meanwhile, the Caspian Tern has dramatically expanded its population in Washington. Caspian Terns on the Pacific coast have been shifting northward for about 50 years. While they are native to the Columbia estuary and have been present in this area for many years, the first recorded colonies established in Washington were in inland lakes, marshes, and impoundments in the eastern part of the state in the 1930s. The first colony recorded in western Washington was established at Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County) in 1957. From 1960 to 1980, the Pacific coast population increased almost 74%, with much of the growth occurring in the Washington colonies. These colonies were scattered along the outer coast and in Puget Sound until the mid-1980s, when a colony began to form in the Columbia River estuary. The estuary population has increased by over 600% since 1986 with an annual growth rate of 15-20%. Habitat loss elsewhere and islands created from dredged materials within the estuary have contributed to this dramatic increase. The nesting population in Washington is now by far the largest on the West Coast north of Mexico, and it is estimated that over 70% of the Pacific coast population nests in the Columbia River estuary. During their nesting period, Caspian Terns in the estuary eat small fish, including young salmon making their way to the ocean, of which there are an estimated 60+ million in the Columbia River. Not surprisingly, the Caspian Tern nesting season coincides with the peak migration period of young salmon. In 2000, the US Army Corps of Engineers attempted to relocate the Caspian Tern colony from Rice Island to East Sand Island, hoping to reduce predation on migrating salmon smolts. Active harassment of the terns was planned, but was stopped through a lawsuit brought by the Seattle Audubon Society, Defenders of Wildlife, American Bird Conservancy, and the National Audubon Society. A settlement reached in 2002 called for the Army Corps of Engineers to complete a comprehensive Environmental Impact Statement to provide responsible management for Caspian Tern colonies in the Columbia River estuary. The Corps will also prepare a long-term management plan that focuses on establishing additional nesting sites outside the Columbia River estuary and reviews the science of tern predation. For more information about Caspian Terns in the Columbia River estuary, go to http://www.columbiabirdresearch.org/ and click on Background. See also http://www.seattleaudubon.org/conservation/ax_caspian_tern_lawsuit.html.	The largest of the terns, the Caspian Tern is one of the most widespread tern species in the world, occurring on every continent except Antarctica. It is white with a light gray mantle and white undersides. The breast and face are also white. The legs and eyes are black, and the bill is large, heavy, and bright red-orange. It has a shallowly forked tail and a slight crest that gives the head a squared-off look. In breeding plumage, the Caspian Tern sports a solid black cap, which recedes in the non-breeding season, resulting in a spray of white at the face mixing with black. Juveniles appear similar to adults in non-breeding plumage but have a lighter mantle that is mottled with light tan.		1	Caspian Terns use fresh- and saltwater wetlands, especially estuaries, coastal bays, and beaches. They are not usually found on open ocean, but prefer protected waters. Nesting usually takes place on low sand or gravel islands with sparse vegetation. In Washington, the birds have shifted their preferred habitat from natural sites inland to coastal, human-altered sites (often islands made from dredged material). They have also shifted from nesting in small groups mixed with gulls to large colonies of only Caspian Terns.	Caspian Terns are most common in the nesting season in the Columbia River estuary (Wahkiakum and Pacific Counties) where the majority of the Washington population nests. A small colony has nested on the Asarco Superfund site on Commencement Bay in southern Puget Sound. During the breeding season, non-breeders can be found in bays and estuaries along the coast and in the Puget Sound region. The birds start leaving the breeding colonies in late June and July, but can be seen through October. In spring, birds first start appearing in late March and April.	Caspian Terns are less gregarious than other terns, nesting in smaller colonies, although this is changing in Washington. They can be quite aggressive. When foraging, they fly with their bills pointing downward. When they spot a fish, they hover and then plunge into the water after it, often submerging completely. Their broad wings allow them to soar, gull-like, flapping with strong, slow wing-beats.	The vast majority of the diet of the Caspian Tern is fish, especially those that swim near the surface of the water. In the Columbia River estuary, where most of Washington's population breeds, salmonid smolts are a major prey item.	Nests on sparsely vegetated islands in Columbia River and elsewhere across Columbia Plateau, and on dredge-spoil islands in saltwater bays. Confirmed breeding from single nesting site in our four-county area, below Wanapum Dam on Columbia River. In 1994, scouts observed at gravelly industrial site north of Renton that has since been developed. Colony of several thousand pairs quickly established on and as quickly displaced from (by 1995) construction site just north of our area at Everett. More recently, another colonization met similar fate on abandoned barge in Commencement Bay at Tacoma.	First breeding at the age of three years, Caspian Terns nest in colonies in areas with no vegetation, often on islands. Both parents help build the nest, which is located on the ground and can range from a scrape in the sand to a depression lined with a sturdy rim of vegetation and mollusk and crustacean shells. Both parents incubate the 1 to 3 eggs for about three weeks. A few days after hatching, the young may leave the nest but stay nearby, or they may remain at the nest until ready to fly. Both parents help feed the young during the long adolescent period. The young first fly about a month after hatching, but may stay with, and be fed by, the parents for many more months.	Some Caspian Terns in Washington are medium-distance migrants, wintering on the coast of California, while others travel greater distances, wintering as far south as Colombia and Venezuela.	caspian_tern	CATE			
228	30	Icteria	virens	Yellow-breasted Chat	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	Although Yellow-breasted Chats host parasitic Brown-headed Cowbirds, their current population is considered stable. In Washington, Breeding Bird Survey data show a non-significant decline since 1980. They historically bred in small numbers in the western Washington lowlands and may still do so on occasion.	The Yellow-breasted Chat is the largest wood-warbler. While it is generally regarded as a warbler, it has many non-warbler characteristics. It has a large, heavy bill, unlike many warblers; males and females look alike; and its unusual song has similarities to that of a thrasher or an oriole. The Yellow-breasted Chat does have typical warbler coloring, however, and is plain olive above with a yellow throat and breast and a white belly. It has a white line between its yellow throat and its olive-gray head. A white eye-ring that extends forward gives it a spectacled look.		1	Yellow-breasted Chats are closely tied to willow thickets, brushy tangles, and other dense, understory habitats. In Washington, they are found in the arid parts of the state, usually at low to medium elevations around streams where this dense, low vegetation grows. They are often found at the ecotone between the forest and steppe zones.	These elusive warblers are quite secretive and can be difficult to see. Yellow-breasted Chats have been recorded during migration in Western Washington. It is possible that the Yellow-breasted Chat is a very rare breeder in the western half of the state, but it is primarily a bird of arid eastern Washington, where it is common from May to the end of July, sometimes into mid-September. Look for Yellow-breasted Chats in the Columbia Basin in riparian areas and in the Yakima River Canyon.	Yellow-breasted Chats do not typically form feeding flocks. When foraging, the Yellow-breasted Chat takes food from the foliage and holds the food with its foot while eating, a behavior not observed in any other warbler species. One of the best chances to see a Yellow-breasted Chat is during its flight display, when the male bursts out of the brush and flies around in the open, with its legs dangling and wings beating in a slow, butterfly-like flight. His song is very loud and distinctive, and he may sing all night long during the height of the breeding season. The song can sound like hoots and whistles, in a repeating pattern similar to that of a mockingbird or thrasher.	Like most warblers, Yellow-breasted Chats eat insects. They also eat fruit, which can make up over half of their diet at certain times of the year.	Fairly common but local in Kittitas County, utilizing shrubby riparian habitats in ponderosa pine/shrub-steppe ecotone and along Columbia and Yakima Rivers. Once rare but regular breeder in Washington west of Cascade crest (Jewett at al. 1953, Hunn 1982); has declined in recent decades but still shows up occasionally, as reflected by possible record from 25 May 1995 at Kent Ponds in southwestern King County. Summering chats recently recorded to north (Skagit County) and south (Pierce and Thurston Counties), but breeding not confirmed on Westside for many years.	Yellow-breasted Chats occasionally nest in loose colonies. Their nests are well concealed, and are usually from 1 to 8 feet off the ground. The female builds a large, open cup, with a base of leaves, straw, and weeds. The inner nest is a tightly woven cup of bark, stems, and grass. The female incubates 3 to 4 eggs for about 11 days. Both members of the pair feed the young. The young fledge about 8 days after hatching, and most pairs raise two broods each season.	Yellow-breasted Chats winter in Mexico and Central America, although they are recorded on the East Coast of the United States in most winters as far north as New England. They do not appear to remain on the Northwest coast in the winter, as there are only three confirmed Northwest winter records, all from southwestern Oregon.	yellow-breasted_chat				
229	30	Icterus	bullockii	Bullock's Oriole	Common summer resident east. Fairly common west.	LC	Bullock's Orioles are widespread and common in appropriate habitat, but much of their streamside forest habitat is at risk in Washington due to demands on groundwater from irrigation. Pesticides also pose direct and indirect threats to Bullock's Orioles. Significant long-term population declines have been recorded in western North America, but there are no significant population trends in Washington at this time. The Bullock's Oriole is one of the few bird species that will puncture and eject Brown-headed Cowbirds' eggs. They sometimes damage their own eggs in the process, but the benefit of this behavior far outweighs the cost. They were formerly rare breeders in western Washington, but the proliferation of hardwood trees in residential areas has resulted in an increase in Bullock's Orioles in the western part of the state. However, they are still less common in western Washington than in eastern Washington. From 1983-1995, the Bullock's Oriole and the Baltimore Oriole were combined into a single species, the Northern Oriole. This lumping was the response to hybridization between the two species in the Great Plains. In 1995 the American Ornithologist's Union revisited this decision and split the Northern Oriole back into two species.	Bullock's Orioles are bright, flashy birds in all plumages. Mature males are deep                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     orange, with black wings, back, and tail tips, and white wing-patches. They have black caps, black lines through each eye, and black throat patches. Females and first-year males are yellow where mature males are orange, but are whitish underneath. They lack the large white wing-patches, but do have two white wing-bars on each side. First-year males can be distinguished from females by their black throats and eye-lines.		1	The typical breeding habitat of Bullock's Orioles in Washington is forested streamside. They primarily inhabit hardwood trees and can often be found in large cottonwoods, willows, and oaks. Freshwater wetlands, irrigated farms, orchards, shrub-steppe, suburban areas, and other edge habitats are also used if there are suitable trees for nesting. During migration, Bullock's Orioles can be found in a wide variety of open woodlands, including urban parks. Their winter habitat requirements are not well known, but appear similar to that of breeding season.	Bullock's Orioles are summer visitors to Washington, spending a mere 14 weeks in our state. They are most common in lowland streamside habitats and orchards east of the Cascades, where they can be seen from early May to early August. While many leave as early as the end of July, a few late lingerers sometimes remain into early winter, visiting suet or hummingbird feeders.	While Bullock's Orioles may form small flocks during migration and winter, they generally forage alone. They forage mainly in the tree canopy, where they glean food from the foliage and occasionally fly out to catch aerial prey. They also forage in open country (shrub-steppe, for example) and sometimes on the ground, especially later in the breeding season.	Bullock's Orioles eat a diet of small invertebrates (including many caterpillars), ripe fruit (especially cherries), and some nectar.	Common at low and middle elevations of Kittitas County in hardwood forests, wetlands, irrigated farmlands, and orchards, reaching greatest density in mature cottonwoods along streams. Slowly increasing west of Cascade crest, where hardwood trees regenerating in formerly conifer-dominated areas multiply breeding opportunities. Now uncommon to fairly common, but local, in parks, suburbs, rural landscapes, and riparian growth of lowland King County. Three confirmed BBA records from Kitsap County, but not detected in Island County andâ??except for northern tip of Whidbey Islandâ??not predicted to breed there by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	Bullock's Orioles are monogamous and nest solitarily, although nests are often grouped together, which may be more a factor of patchy breeding habitat than colonialism. Pair bonds typically last for a single breeding season. The nest is often located in a willow, cottonwood, or other hardwood tree, and is a pendulous basket suspended from a thin branch that commonly hangs over water. The female picks the nest site and weaves the nest, but the male may help with construction. The nest often appears gray, and is made of hair, twine, grass, and wool, lined with plant-down, hair, or feathers. The female typically incubates 4 to 5 eggs for about 11 days and then broods the young after they hatch. Both parents bring food to the young, which leave the nest after about 14 days. Family groups typically stay together after the young fledge, and may join with other families in post-breeding flocks.	Bullock's Orioles are Neotropical migrants and travel at night between their breeding and wintering grounds.  Birds begin to arrive on the breeding grounds between March and May, and leave for the winter between July and August.  Almost the entire population winters in western Mexico.	bullocks_oriole	BUOR			
230	30	Icterus	cucullatus	Hooded Oriole		LC		The adult male is mainly orange but with a black back, tail, face, and bib. The dark wing shows two white wingbars, the upper one stronger. The female is plain olive-green above and yellowish-green below, and is easily confused with the female Orchard Oriole. Hooded is somewhat larger than Orchard overall with a longer bill and a longer tail. See field guides for identification pointers for separating the various oriole species in immature and female plumages.

The Hooded Oriole breeds from California across the lower Southwest to southern Texas and adjacent parts of northern Mexico, and down both coasts of Mexico. Northern populations move south to Mexico for the winter. Most records from the Pacific Northwest are spring &#8220;overshoots&#8221; of returning migrants, with a few extending into July. Idaho&#8217;s only record, in 2000, stayed right through June and July. Roughly one-third of Oregon&#8217;s twenty-plus records have occurred in winter, including several birds that stayed for many weeks. British Columbia has about six records, most in spring and all from coastal sites; one bird remained near Prince Rupert for the entire winter (19 November&#8211;2 April). Washington&#8217;s seven accepted records are all from the Westside lowlands; six were from spring and the other was in July.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								hooded_oriole				
231	30	Icterus	galbula	Baltimore Oriole		LC		The Baltimore Oriole breeds across southern Canada and the United States east of the Rocky Mountains and winters mostly from central Mexico to northwestern South America. It hybridizes with Bullock&#8217;s Oriole in a narrow zone where their ranges meet in the Great Plains, and as a result, the two were once lumped together as a single species (&#8220;Northern Oriole&#8221;). However, the American Ornithologists&#8217; Union split them again in 1995 on the basis of genetic studies that showed them not even to be one another&#8217;s nearest relatives.

The adult male Baltimore Oriole is bright orange with a black hood and back and a large white wingbar. The adult female has a grayish crown and back and two white wingbars. The underparts range in coloration from almost as bright orange as the male in some individuals to a light orange-yellow in others. Immatures generally resemble adult females; consult field guides for separating these plumages from Bullock&#8217;s and other orioles.

Baltimore Oriole breeds in northeastern British Columbia, east of the Rockies, but occurs only casually elsewhere in the province. Three of Idaho&#8217;s four records are from May&#8211;June; the other is from mid-August. Washington also has four records, three of them between 31 May and 20 June and the other in early November; two are from east of the Cascades and two are from the Westside. Half of Oregon&#8217;s ten records are from fall and winter and the other half are from spring.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								baltimore_oriole				
232	30	Icterus	parisorum	Scott's Oriole		LC		The adult male Scott&#8217;s Oriole cannot be confused with any other bird likely to be seen in Washington. A large oriole&#8212;the size of a Bullock&#8217;s&#8212;it has a black head, back, and breast; vivid yellow underparts; a black wing with a yellow shoulder patch and white wingbar; and a black tail with a yellow base. The adult female resembles the male but with less extensive black. However, immature birds can be easily misidentified, especially when they occur in unexpected places. Grayish above and dirty yellow below, they look rather like certain plumages of the somewhat smaller Hooded Oriole. In Washington, any oriole that appears to be outside the norms for Bullock&#8217;s Oriole should be studied attentively. Consultation of a good field guide is advised.

Scott&#8217;s Oriole is a bird of the deserts of the American Southwest and of northern and central Mexico. Breeding populations of the northern part of the range, including the United States, move south for the winter. Scott&#8217;s Oriole breeds locally in southeastern Idaho at the northern extremity of its breeding range. Otherwise it is an exceptionally rare vagrant in the Pacific Northwest. Oregon has two spring records. Washington&#8217;s lone record is of an adult male that frequented a feeder in Chehalis (Lewis County) from 11 February to 13 April 1980. There are no records from British Columbia.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								scotts_oriole				
233	30	Icterus	spurius	Orchard Oriole		LC		With its black head, throat, and back, and chestnut underparts, the adult male is unmistakable. Adult females and first-winter birds are quite plain, however: olive-green above, lighter greenish-yellow below, with two white wingbars. The bill is thin, sharply pointed, and slightly downcurved, which helps distinguish this small oriole from warblers. Birds other than adult males may easily be confused with comparable plumages of Hooded Oriole, which has a longer tail and a longer bill. Consult field guides for other subtle distinctions.

The Orchard Oriole is a common breeder in open woods and edge habitats south of the boreal forest zone, across the United States from the Great Plains to the Atlantic Seabord and southward to the central plateau of Mexico. It winters from Mexico to northwestern South America and is a casual to accidental vagrant in the Pacific Northwest. British Columbia has a single record (Saltspring Island in May) and Idaho has none. Two of the three records so far accepted for Washington are from the Westside in fall and early winter; the other is from the Eastside in June. Oregon&#8217;s seven accepted records occurred on both sides of the Cascades and in all seasons except summer.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								orchard_oriole				
234	67	Ixoreus	naevius	Varied Thrush	Common resident west. Fairly common east.	LC	Varied Thrushes are currently still common, but are vulnerable to loss of habitat due to the cutting of forests throughout their range. There are two subspecies found in Washington, separated by the Cascades. Historically, Varied Thrushes bred in Puget Sound lowlands, but settlement has resulted in a decline in breeding in western Washington lowlands. Breeding Bird Survey data have shown a significant decline from 1982-1991, but there has been a significant increase in Washington from 1966-1991.	Similar in size and shape to the American Robin but slighter in build, the Varied Thrush is a boldly patterned bird. In the male, the rust-colored belly and throat are interrupted by a black breast-band; the female has a lighter, grayish band. A similar band lines the face at the eye. A rust-colored stripe lines the head above the eye-band, and the crown is bluish gray, as are the back and tail. The wings are boldly patterned with slate, black, and rust. Female patterning is similar, but the back is brownish.		1	The Varied Thrush is a bird of thick, damp, mossy coniferous forests. Although it prefers dense, wet, old-growth forests, it can be found in a variety of forest types, including mixed forests. During migration and in winter, it frequents ravines and thickets, especially near streams. In winter, it may also be found on lawns and road edges.	Varied Thrushes are common in conifer forests throughout the state. In western Washington, they are found in all forest zones, but do not breed in urban areas around Puget Sound. In eastern Washington, they are found in the montane and sub-alpine forests at higher elevations above the Ponderosa pine zone. They can be found at lower elevations especially along streams.	The Varied Thrush is similar in behavior to the American Robin, but more elusive. Much of its foraging is done on the ground, usually in dense cover, although sometimes it forages on open lawns and roads. The Varied Thrush's song is a unique fuzzy, metallic whistle on different pitches.	Like other species of thrushes, Varied Thrushes eat a combination of insects and berries, shifting seasonally. In winter, they feed on berries, seeds, and acorns, in trees or shrubs or on the ground. In summer, they prey on insects and other invertebrates.	Common in King County coniferous forests at moderate to high elevation. Absent from Puget Trough lowlands where historically present prior to removal of original forests. A few birds linger in lowlands into May, but no evidence of breeding recorded west of forested Cascade foothills. In western Kittitas County, fairly common to locally common in moist, high-elevation conifer forests, but much less common at higher elevations of Wenatchee Mountains away from Cascade crest.	The male Varied Thrush sings to defend his territory. The song is most often heard at dawn, dusk, and after a rain shower. The female builds the nest in a conifer at the base of a branch against the trunk, usually 5-15 feet off the ground. The nest is a bulky, open cup made of twigs, moss, leaves, and pieces of bark, lined with soft grass and rootlets. The female lays 3-4 eggs that she incubates. Both parents feed the young. They raise two broods in a season when possible.	Varied Thrushes are altitudinal migrants. They generally breed at middle to high elevations. They head down into the lowlands in winter. In late winter and early spring, they may wander to more open areas, and then in March and April they return to their breeding range. Winter range may depend on severity of weather.	varied_thrush	VATH			
235	42	Junco	hyemalis	Dark-eyed Junco	Common resident.	LC	Until 1973, the five different forms of the Dark-eyed Junco were considered five separate species.  Dark-eyed Juncos are widespread and abundant in Washington.	The Dark-eyed Junco is commonly found in Washington in two forms, the Oregon and the Slate-colored.  It is unclear whether other races of Dark-eyed Junco occur in the state.  In Washington, the Oregon form is by far the more common.  All forms in Washington have distinctive white outer tail feathers, white bellies, and pink bills.  Oregon Juncos have dark hoods, which are bold black in males and gray in females and juveniles.  They have rufous sides, brown backs, and gray wings.  Slate-colored Juncos may have a brownish tinge on their backs, but for the most part are dark gray all over except for the white belly.		1	During the breeding season, Dark-eyed Juncos use a variety of forested habitat, but prefer moist conifer or mixed forests with dense understory and forest openings.  During the winter, they can be found in open woodlands and brushy areas including towns, gardens, and shrub-steppe habitat.	Dark-eyed Juncos are among the most abundant winter birds in Washington, present in almost all habitats with the exception of high altitudes and dense forests.  They are most common in winter in the western lowlands, but many can also be found in eastern Washington, where they are patchily distributed but often form flocks of up to 100 birds.  As breeders, they are common and widespread in appropriate habitat in forested zones, even in city parks.	Dark-eyed Juncos are flocking birds with a distinct social hierarchy.  They forage on the ground in these groups, scratching with their feet to find food.  The flash of white tail feathers serve as a signal that alerts members of the flock when one is alarmed.	During the summer, about half of the Dark-eyed Junco's diet is made up of insects and other arthropods, the other half consists of seeds.  The young eat mostly arthropods.  In winter, the diet shifts more to seeds and berries.	Common and widespread throughout in variety of wooded habitats from sea level up to tree line, but prefers forest openings with dense ground cover. Most abundant in open conifer forest, particularly in western Kittitas County. Uncommon breeder in city parks and in suburban and semi-rural residential areas of western counties, although may be declining. Winters commonly in urban core where occasional birds may remain and attempt breeding in spring, after most have retreated to forests of Cascades, Olympics, and foothills.	The male Dark-eyed Junco sings from a high perch to defend his territory and attract a mate.  During courtship, both members of a pair hop about on the ground with their wings drooped and their tails spread, showing off their white outer tail feathers.  The nest, which the female builds, is almost always on the ground.  It is often in a depression, hidden under grass, a log, a rock, or an upturned tree root.  The nest is a cup made of grass, moss, lichen, rootlets, twigs, and bark fiber, and is lined with fine grass, hair, or feathers.  The female incubates 3 to 5 eggs for 11 to 13 days.  Both parents feed the chicks, which leave the nest at 9 to 11 days.  Pairs typically raise 1 or 2 broods per year.	Most Dark-eyed Juncos are migratory, following the food supply south, but many will winter over, given an adequate food supply.  Males winter farther north than females.  Some Washington birds are resident, but most migrate either north-south, or up and down in elevation.	dark-eyed_junco	DEJU			
236	46	Lagopus	leucura	White-tailed Ptarmigan	Uncommon resident.	LC	White-tailed Ptarmigans still occupy most of their historic range since much of that alpine habitat is fairly undisturbed.  They generally live in areas that are open to the public and can potentially be negatively affected by a number of man-made influences, especially since the alpine zone is so slow to recover from disturbance.	The smallest grouse in North America, the White-tailed Ptarmigan is pure white in the winter, and streaked brown and gray during the summer.  The tail remains white throughout the year.  In Washington, this is the only species of grouse with white tail feathers.		1	This species is found in remote, rocky, alpine areas at around 7,000 feet in Washington.	The White-tailed Ptarmigan is common in appropriate habitat in the Cascade Mountains.  It is not found in the Olympic Mountains.  This can be a very difficult bird to find, because much of the area that it inhabits is remote, it is cryptically colored, and it does not move when approached.	These birds generally prefer walking over flight, perhaps as a means to conserve energy in their unforgiving habitat.  Once pair bonds are formed, the male shadows the female constantly until she begins to incubate the eggs.  These pair bonds can last up to 3 months within a season, which is atypical of the grouse family, and often the same pair bonds will reform the following year.  During the fall and winter, they can be found in loose flocks, but are more territorial during the breeding season.  They commonly make use of willows and the moist vegetation at the edge of snowfields.  In winters with heavy snowfall, they will often move below the timberline.	Like most members of the family, the White-tailed Ptarmigan eats predominantly buds, leaves, and seeds.  In the summer, this staple diet is supplemented with fruit, flowers, and insects.  They are highly dependent on willow, especially in the winter.  They have been known, like other members of this group, to swallow grit to help grind coarse food in their gizzards.	Uncommon resident on high peaks north of Snoqualmie Pass on both sides of Cascade crest. Forages and nests on subalpine parkland and alpine tundra among rocks, willows, and snowfields. Two confirmed BBA records, from Big Snow Mountain (King County) and Bears Breast Mountain (Kittitas County). Ptarmigan also recorded outside BBA period on Alta Mountain (Kittitas County) and Snoqualmie Peak (King County).	The male guards the female while she selects a spot on the ground in a meadow or rocky area where she scrapes the ground and pulls vegetation around her in a rim.  She keeps adding to this rim until she begins to incubate the eggs, at which point, the male ceases to guard her.  Within 6-12 hours of hatching, the female leads her clutch of 4-8 chicks to food sources where they are able to feed themselves.  They do not return to the nest.	White-tailed Ptarmigans are permanent residents, although they do tend to move to lower elevations where they can find vegetation to feed on during the winter.  Even at these lower elevations, however, they remain above the snowline.  Females move farther down slope than males, although both arrive in wintering areas in early-mid October.  Males arrive on the breeding grounds in late April and females follow in mid-May.	white-tailed_ptarmigan				
237	31	Lanius	excubitor	Northern Shrike	Uncommon winter resident.	LC	Christmas Bird Count data reveal a decline in wintering birds in Washington. Oregon, however, has seen a slight increase, which may reflect a shift southward. Many populations of Northern Shrikes around the world are in decline, and while there is no clear evidence of decline in North America, this species should be monitored carefully.	This medium-sized, gray songbird is the larger and paler of the two species of shrike in North America. The Northern Shrike has a light gray underside, and a darker gray back. Its wings are black with white patches, and its tail is black with white corners. It has a large bill that is hooked at the end, and a narrow, black mask across its face. The female is slightly browner with a less distinctive mask than that of the male. Young birds are almost totally brown. Their wings are dark, but when they are folded up on the perched bird, they can be difficult to see and use as a fieldmark. The juvenile also has a less obvious mask, a paler bill, and barred underparts. Northern Shrikes, in comparison with Loggerhead Shrikes, have larger bills and narrower masks. Northern Shrikes occur in Washington only during the non-breeding season; for most of the year, they do not occur in Washington at the same time as Loggerhead Shrikes.		1	Found all across the Northern Hemisphere, Northern Shrikes breed in northern boreal forests in semi-open areas along streams or edges. They winter in open lowlands, but prefer areas with more tree and shrub cover than those frequented by Loggerhead Shrikes.	Winter visitors, Northern Shrikes can be found in Washington from late October to mid-April in appropriate habitat throughout the state. Their abundance varies, but they are typically more common in eastern than western Washington, and more common early in winter rather than later. In the shrub-steppe zone, Northern Shrikes are one of only a few species of songbird present in winter.	Northern Shrikes need large territories and thus are found only in low densities.  They hunt by watching from high perches, then flying swiftly down after prey.  Shrikes use their hooked bills to break the necks of vertebrate prey. Because their feet are not large or strong enough to hold prey, shrikes find a crotch in a tree, a thorn, or barbed wire to hang their prey on while they eat. Prey may be left on such a site for later consumption. During courtship, males sing to defend their territories and attract mates. Their song is complex and often includes imitated parts of other birds' songs.	Northern Shrikes eat mostly small vertebrates, especially voles and other rodents. They also eat small birds and large insects, and can kill prey as large as they are.		Both sexes probably help with nest building. The nest is usually located in a low tree or large shrub, 6-15 feet above the ground. The nest itself is a loose, bulky cup of twigs, grass, bark, and moss, lined with feathers and hair. The female incubates 4-7 eggs for 15-17 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 19-20 days. The parents continue to feed and tend the young for another 3-4 weeks.	Migration occurs in mid-fall and early in spring. Numbers on the wintering grounds can vary considerably from year to year, with large numbers occurring in invasion years.	northern_shrike	NSHR			
238	31	Lanius	ludovicianus	Loggerhead Shrike	Uncommon summer, rare winter east.	LC	The numbers of Loggerhead Shrikes have declined across North America, for reasons that are not well understood.  The decline has been extreme in the northeastern US, and they are considered extirpated from New England. The US Fish and Wildlife Service currently lists it as a species of concern. It is a candidate for listing by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, and is considered an at-risk species by the Washington Gap Analysis Project.  While the Breeding Bird Survey has not found significant declines in Washington, there have been non-significant declines, and the Loggerhead's decline throughout the rest of its range is of concern in Washington.  It is considered an important indicator-species for the health of the shrub-steppe ecosystem, which has undergone major destruction and alteration.  Protection of habitat and reduction of pesticide use should both be implemented to stem this decline, while more research is done to understand it more fully.	This medium-sized, gray songbird is the smaller and darker of the two species of shrike in North America.  The Loggerhead Shrike has a gray underside and a darker gray back.  Its wings are black with white patches, and its tail is black with white corners.  Its head is large in proportion to its body.  It has a heavy bill that is hooked at the very tip, and a wide black mask across its face.  Juveniles are browner than adults, with buffy wing-bars and barred underparts. Loggerhead Shrikes have a shorter bill and a broader mask than Northern Shrikes.  Their cheeks are brighter white, giving more contrast to their facial pattern.  For the most part, the two species are found in Washington at different times of year, but they do overlap in some places.		1	Loggerhead Shrikes are found only in North America. They breed in open country, including grasslands and shrub-steppe areas, where there are scattered trees, tall shrubs, fence posts, utility wires, or other lookout posts.  They tend to nest in northeast- or southeast-facing ravines.  Loggerhead Shrikes prefer more open country than that preferred by Northern Shrikes.	A few wintering birds can be found in most years in the Columbia River bottoms east to the Tri-Cities area, and occasionally but rarely in western Washington.  They are mostly summer visitors, however, and are usually common in eastern Washington from mid-March to mid-September.  They commonly nest at Hanford (Benton County), at the Yakima Training Center and Toppenish National Wildlife Refuge (Yakima County), along the Colville Plateau and east of Tonasket (Okanogan County), as well as in other areas of appropriate habitat in eastern Washington. The Loggerhead Shrike is rarely seen in Washington during the winter.	Loggerhead Shrikes need large territories and thus are found only in low densities.  They hunt by watching from high perches, then flying swiftly down after prey.  Shrikes use their hooked bills to break the necks of vertebrate prey. Because their feet are not large or strong enough to hold prey, shrikes find a crotch in a tree, a thorn, or barbed wire to hang their prey on while they eat. Prey may be left on such a site for later consumption.	The Loggerhead Shrike is predominantly an insect-eater, especially in the summer when it feeds largely on grasshoppers. It also occasionally eats small lizards, rodents, and small birds.	Uncommon in relatively undisturbed shrub-steppe habitat at low to middle elevations in eastern Kittitas County. Prefers alternating patches of shrub-steppe and grass.	Loggerhead Shrikes nest in dense, thorny trees or shrubs, brush-piles, and even tumbleweeds. In Washington, they prefer tall, dense shrubs, usually in ravines.  During courtship, the male makes short display flights and feeds the female.  Both sexes help find the nest site and gather materials, but the female builds the nest, which is a bulky cup of twigs, grass, weeds, and bark lined with rootlets, hair, and feathers.  The female incubates 5-6 eggs for 15-17 days, and then broods the young for the first 4-5 days after they hatch.  The male brings food to the female and the young during this time.  After this initial period, both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 17-20 days and start to fly about a week later.  The parents continue to feed and tend the young for another 3-4 weeks.	Loggerhead Shrikes winter primarily in the southern US. Many winter in the Central Valley of California, and also along the Texas coast.  They usually arrive in Washington in mid-March and leave by mid-September, although a very few birds winter here.  Those that do migrate are short- to medium-distance migrants.	loggerhead_shrike				
239	32	Larus	argentatus	Herring Gull	Fairly common winter resident.	LC	The Herring Gull is currently the most widespread large gull.  It experienced a sharp decline during the 19th Century, mostly due to feather- and egg-hunting. The dramatic recovery and range expansion of the Herring Gull during the 20th Century is due to a number of factors, including protection from feather-hunting and egg-harvesting. Increased commercial fishing has reduced populations of large predatory fish, allowing an increase in numbers of small and medium-sized fish. A reduction of marine mammal populations has also helped to ease pressure on the small and medium fish.  Increased numbers of garbage dumps following the spread of human populations along coastlines may aid in juvenile survival. Populations in the historic range have recovered, and new areas have been colonized as Herring Gulls expand their range down the Atlantic Coast. A concurrent range expansion has not been seen on the West Coast. In the mid-1970s and 1980s, numbers leveled off, perhaps due to closure and modification of garbage dumps, as well as the reduction of even the small and medium fish stocks. On the West Coast, the status of the Herring Gull is confused by its hybridization with the Glaucous-winged Gull in Alaska, and by the fact that the Thayer's Gull was considered a subspecies of Herring Gull from 1956-1972. The numbers of Herring Gulls breeding in British Columbia appear to be increasing.	The Herring Gull is a large gull that can easily be confused with almost any of the other large gull species. The adult wears the typical gull-like plumage of slate-gray back and wings, a white body and head, and black wingtips spotted with white. The legs of the Herring Gull are pink, and the eyes are yellow. The beak is yellow with a red spot on the lower mandible, as in most large gulls. In breeding plumage, the eye has a narrow, fleshy, red ring. Juvenile plumage has a varying degree of mottled brown and white. Herring Gulls reach maturity when they are four years old.		1	Herring Gulls use a wide variety of habitats near water. They are common on beaches, mudflats, plowed fields, marshes, docks, commercial fishing areas, and garbage dumps. In the breeding season, they nest on islands. In winter, they are more strongly associated with salt water or open fresh water and are widely distributed along the coasts.	In winter, Herring Gulls can commonly be seen in small numbers roosting with other large gulls in all regions of the state, except for the mountains, in marine and fresh water habitats. In eastern Washington, they are common in these waters from October to April, and absent the rest of the year. In western Washington, they are common during migration from February to mid-April, and again in October. The greatest concentration of Herring Gulls in Washington is the lower Columbia River near Vancouver WA (Clark County), especially in March during the smelt run. In eastern Washington, they can be seen on Banks Lake (Grant County) in winter.	An opportunistic species, the Herring Gull forages while walking, swimming, and flying. It may steal food from other birds, and will drop shellfish from high in the air onto rocks or pavement to break the shells.	Herring Gulls feed mostly on natural prey such as marine fish and invertebrates, although the diet varies considerably with season and location. In addition to marine life, Herring Gulls also eat other birds, eggs, garbage, and carrion.		Relatively long-lived birds, Herring Gulls don't typically breed until they are four or five years old. They generally nest in colonies, often with other gull species, and they also nest outside of colonies. Both members of a pair help build the nest, which is typically located on the ground in a sheltered location to protect it from the wind. The nest is a shallow scrape lined with grass, feathers, and other debris. The typical clutch size is 3 eggs, which both parents incubate for about 4 weeks. A day or two after hatching, the young leave the nest, although they stay nearby. The young first fly at the age of about six weeks. The parents continue to feed the young by regurgitation for approximately another month after they begin to fly.	On the West Coast, dispersal from breeding colonies in British Columbia begins in late July. Migrants heading south start showing up along the Washington coastline in August, and numbers increase throughout the fall. Herring Gulls can be found year round as far north as Alaska, although young birds are typically found farther south in the winter than adults, and it appears that only non-breeders are migratory. Spring migration occurs in Washington between late March and mid-May.	herring_gull	HERG			
240	32	Larus	atricilla	Laughing Gull		LC		The Laughing Gull attains full adult plumage in three years. The breeding-plumaged adult has a black hood, white crescents above and below the eyes, a red bill, and a dark gray mantle. It resembles Franklin&#8217;s Gull but is noticeably larger with black (not red) legs and solid black outer primaries (wingtips) with no white. The head of the adult in winter plumage is white with a hint of gray behind the eye, and the bill is black. As with most gulls, identification of birds in immature plumages requires care and experience; consult a good field guide.

The main population of this New World gull breeds along the coast from Atlantic Canada to the Gulf Coast states, Mexico, the West Indies, Central America, and Venezuela, and winters from the Carolinas south to Brazil and Peru. A smaller population breeds in northwestern Mexico&#8212;principally the Gulf of California. Many post-breeding birds move north to the Salton Sea and the southern California coast, but Laughing Gull is a very rare vagrant farther north along the Pacific Coast. Washington&#8217;s four records occurred from mid-July to early September. Three were along or off the outer coast and the fourth was from Wenatchee (Chelan County). Oregon has three records and there are two from British Columbia.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								laughing_gull				
241	32	Larus	californicus	California Gull	Common resident.	LC	Known as the gull that rid the early Mormon settlers in Utah of plagues of grasshoppers, the California Gull is still considered a beneficial species throughout its range, although it has been associated with some crop damage. It is similar in its requirements to the Ring-billed Gull, but its population is smaller and its range more limited. The creation of many dams in eastern Washington has increased nesting habitat there, resulting in significant population increases in the past 50 years. Garbage dumps serve as a source of winter food, helping to sustain the population throughout the year. In 1996 there were 2,000 pairs of California Gulls nesting in Benton County, 4,000 in Walla Walla County, and 1,000 in Klickitat County.	A medium-sized gull, the California Gull has the typical 'gull-like' appearance'slate-gray back and wings, white head and body, and black wingtips with white spots. The black on the wingtips is more extensive than that of other gulls. The California Gull's eye is dark, and its legs are greenish-yellow. The beak is yellow with red and black marks. Juveniles are, to varying degrees, mottled brown and white, mixed with the adult plumage, with pink legs and beak.  It takes four years for California Gulls to mature. This gull is intermediate in size between the smaller Ring-billed Gull and the larger Herring Gull, both of which it resembles.		1	The California Gull is an inland breeding bird but may be seen at any season in marine habitats. It is common far from land in late summer and fall. As a breeder, it can survive in habitats that are too harsh for Herring and Ring-billed Gulls. During the breeding season, California Gulls inhabit lakes, farms, and marshes. They typically nest on gravel islands in large rivers or lakes. In winter, they spend time in nearly every habitat found along the Pacific Coast.	In winter, California Gulls can be found all along the coastline, and also well offshore. It is the only Pacific gull that follows offshore ships in the summer and fall.  Small numbers can also be seen on water throughout the Puget Trough in the winter. (It is common from the end of March to early November in Washington.)  Breeders can be found in the Columbia Basin and along the Columbia River in Klickitat County. In Grant County, there is a nesting colony by Dry Falls Dam. During summer, small numbers of non-breeders are seen throughout the Puget Trough and along the outer coast, especially at the mouth of the Columbia River. During migration, it is common in offshore, coastal, and western Washington regions. Migrants have also been reported at high elevations throughout the Cascades.	California Gulls use a variety of foraging strategies, feeding while walking, wading, swimming, or flying. They are often seen on farms or in fields, following behind the plows and picking up insects uncovered by the machinery. They have also been reported to lie in wait for rodents to be flooded out of their holes when fields are irrigated.	In Washington, California Gulls feed in agricultural lands, cities, and wetlands near their nesting areas. In agricultural areas in this state, they feed primarily on small rodents. Insects, fish, eggs, and garbage are also part of the diet of this opportunistic feeder.	Breeds colonially on gravel islands in lakes and rivers on Columbia Plateau. One confirmed nesting site in our area, below Wanapum Dam on Columbia River. During post-breeding dispersal beginning in June, California Gulls migrate west across Snoqualmie Pass and other mountain passes and gather along shores of Puget Sound.	California Gulls begin breeding at the age of four. They are colony nesters, sometimes in mixed colonies with Ring-billed or Herring Gulls, although they don't typically hybridize with either of those species. The colonies are usually large and are often on an island.  Nests are located on the ground, and may be quite close together. The birds form monogamous pair bonds for the duration of the breeding season and may re-pair in succeeding seasons.  However, they often pair with different birds, even when both members of a former pair are still alive. Both help build the nest, a shallow scrape in the ground lined with weeds, bones, feathers, and other debris. Clutches are usually 2-3 eggs, and nests with more than 3 eggs are attributed to multiple females. Both parents help incubate the eggs for about 3½ weeks. The young leave the nest after a few days, but stay nearby, fed regurgitated food by their parents until they can fly at the age of about 6½ weeks.	Most California Gulls breed in the interior and migrate to the Pacific Coast. Some birds winter inland, and others, especially younger birds, remain in coastal areas throughout the summer.	california_gull	CAGU			
242	32	Larus	canus	Mew Gull	Common winter west, rare east.	LC	Numbers appear to be stable since Mew Gulls seem to benefit from human activities.	The smallest North American white-headed gull, the Mew Gull is commonly described as having a 'gentle' or 'dove-headed' look. The Mew Gull has typical gull-like plumage--slate-gray back and wings, a white head, tail, and body, and black wingtips with white spots. The beak and legs are yellow. In breeding plumage, the Mew Gull has a clean white head, a dark eye, and a solid yellow bill without markings. In non-breeding plumage, its head is smudged with brown, the red eye-ring is absent, and the bill is partially dark. Juveniles are varying degrees of mottled brown interspersed with white and gray.		1	In winter, the Mew Gull inhabits coastal waters, and is commonly found in estuaries, river mouths, and freshwater ponds close to the shore. Summer habitat is concentrated around northern lakes. This species is not common at garbage dumps in any season and is seldom found offshore.	Mew Gulls are not known to breed in Washington, but breeding records exist from southern British Columbia, so breeding in Washington is a possibility. They are common all along the Pacific Coast from August to early May, and a rare visitor to eastern Washington from mid-September to mid-November. Groups of Mew Gulls can be found in agricultural fields along the lower Columbia River, and at the mouth of the River during the spring smelt runs in March.	Mew Gulls can be found with other gulls at abundant food sources, such as spawning areas and along tidal convergence zones. Like many gulls, the Mew Gull uses a variety of foraging techniques, obtaining food while walking, wading, swimming, or flying.  It often feeds in fields and at sewage ponds. The Mew Gull sometimes carries a hard-shelled mollusk into the air and drops it on rocks or pavement to break it open.	Mew Gulls are omnivores whose diet varies with the season.  On their breeding grounds, Mew Gulls eat mostly insects, which they often catch in mid-air. In coastal areas during the non-breeding season, small fish, crustaceans, and mollusks make up the majority of the diet. Other marine creatures, earthworms, small rodents, young birds, eggs, carrion, refuse, grain, and berries round out the diet of this opportunistic species.		Breeding in small colonies or isolated pairs, Mew Gulls nest on high ground near water, or on top of a stump, or in a dense spruce up to 20 feet off the ground. Mew Gulls in Europe have been known to nest on gravel rooftops. When the nest is on the ground, it is a shallow scrape lined with grass. Nests built in trees are usually shallow cups of twigs and grasses. Both sexes help build the nest and incubate the 3 eggs for about 4 weeks. The young from nests built on the ground may leave the nest after a few days, but stay close by. The young in nests built in trees stay in the nest for a longer period. Both parents help feed the young, which fledge at about 4 weeks of age.	Inland breeders, Mew Gulls migrate directly to the coast, and disperse south from there. They first start appearing along the coast in late July, and numbers increase gradually through the fall. The height of the migration in the Northwest is from October to December. Migration back to the breeding grounds in the spring begins in March and continues through May.	mew_gull	MEGU			
243	32	Larus	crassirostris	Black-tailed Gull		LC		This very rare visitor from East Asia is about the same size as a Ring-billed Gull. In adult plumage, which it attains in four years, the mantle is a bit darker than that of the Western Gull and the tail shows a prominent dark band just above the white tail tip. The yellow bill has a red ring close to the tip with a black ring behind it. The eye and the legs are yellow. The head is strongly streaked with brown in winter. Immature birds are more difficult to identify; consult a good field guide.

Black-tailed Gull is found along coastlines from far eastern Russia south to China, Japan, and Korea. It is a vagrant to Alaska and also farther south along the coasts of North America as far as the U.S.&#8211;Mexico border, mostly on the Atlantic side. Washington&#8217;s only accepted record was from the mouth of Willapa Bay (Pacific County), where it was seen intermittently from August to October 2004. California also has a single record, as does British Columbia. There are none for Oregon.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								black-tailed_gull				
244	32	Larus	delawarensis	Ring-billed Gull	Common resident.	LC	The Ring-billed Gull population suffered a major decline at the beginning of the 20th Century because of hunting, but it has since rebounded and is currently thriving throughout its range, so much so that it is considered a nuisance in some areas. Much of the current population boom can be attributed to its ability to exploit food sources such as garbage dumps, large-scale agricultural operations, and irrigation facilities. In 1990, the North American population of Ring-billed Gulls was estimated at 3-4 million and growing. The first breeding colonies in this state were in eastern Washington and were established as early as 1930. Ring-billed Gulls did not colonize western Washington until 1976, when the first pairs nested at Willapa Bay and Whitcomb Island in Grays Harbor. Dam projects in eastern Washington have helped the population continue to grow in that part of the state. The population has grown in western Washington as well, but competition with larger gull species may restrict this growth.	A medium-sized, white-headed gull, the Ring-billed Gull appears similar to the Herring and California Gulls, but is smaller, with a shorter bill that has a broad, black ring around it. The Ring-billed Gull is slightly larger and bulkier than the Mew Gull. The white body and tail, slate-gray back and wings, and black wingtips with large, white spots (windows), typical of most gulls, are all present on the Ring-billed Gull. The juvenile is mottled brown mixed with adult plumage characteristics. It has pink legs and a pink bill with a dark tip. As the bird matures, the legs turn yellow, and the bill becomes yellow with a black ring. The adult's eye is also yellow. The adult in non-breeding plumage has brown streaking on its head. The Ring-billed Gull takes three years to reach maturity.		1	Ring-billed Gulls are found in a wide variety of habitats and occur over much of inland North America. They are usually found near fresh or salt water, and take advantage of foraging opportunities in developed areas such as parking lots, restaurants, garbage dumps, and agricultural areas. They also inhabit more natural areas such as coasts and bays. They are rarely found far offshore.	The Ring-billed Gull is common in eastern Washington, breeding colonially on gravel islands in lakes and rivers, and feeding in agricultural fields, cities, and wetlands near the breeding colonies. In western Washington, they are locally common on the dredge-spoil islands in Grays Harbor and Willapa Bay. Non-breeders are also abundant in western Washington in the summer. Migrants have been observed at fairly high elevations in the Cascades. In winter, they are common in coastal areas and the Puget Trough, and are fairly common in eastern Washington in the Columbia Basin, although they are less common here in severe winters.	Like most gulls, Ring-billed Gulls are gregarious, adaptable, and opportunistic. They do much of their feeding on land, but also forage while wading, swimming, or flying. These gulls spend a considerable amount of time scavenging and often steal food from other birds. They congregate at sewage ponds and in agricultural fields, where they follow plows, picking up insects and small rodents.	Ring-billed Gulls eat a wide variety of things, including insects, grubs, earthworms, sewage, garbage, small rodents, fish, and other aquatic organisms.	In Washington, breeds colonially on gravel islands in lakes and rivers on Columbia Plateau, and (since 1976) on dredge-spoil islands on outer coast. One confirmed nesting site in four-county BBA area, below Wanapum Dam on Columbia River. No known breeding in King, Kitsap, or Island Counties, although non-breeding individuals may be seen at any season. Two pairs nested just north of our area at Everett on Puget Sound in 1995, in company of Caspian Terns, but that site has since been developed.	The Ring-billed Gull can be found in mixed colonies with larger gulls, where they are often forced to use sub-optimal habitat close to the water, and their nests are at risk of flooding. Colonies are located on low-lying, sandy islands, and nests are built on the ground. Both members of a pair help build a small nest of grass and twigs. Both help incubate the 2-4 eggs for 4 weeks, and both help brood and feed once the young hatch. The young may wander out of the nest after 2 days, but will stay close until after they fledge at about 5 weeks. Nests with more than four eggs are usually the result of two females sharing a nest.	Ring-billed Gulls migrate in flocks, following coastlines and major river valleys. In Washington, many winter residents are present along the coastline. Breeders in eastern Washington may stay in the lowlands year round, but many migrate to the coast.	ring-billed_gull	RBGU			
245	32	Larus	fuscus	Lesser Black-backed Gull		LC		The Lesser Black-backed Gull is about the size of a California Gull but slimmer looking. In adult plumage, attained in four years, it is like no other gull in Washington: dark gray mantle (darker than our local race of Western Gull), yellow legs, yellow eye, white head in breeding plumage streaked brown in winter. Immature plumages are more complicated and better covered in field guides than is possible here.

This European native has been an increasingly common visitor to North America since the 1970s, mostly along the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts but also in lesser numbers in the interior of the continent and on the West Coast. The first record from the Pacific Northwest occurred at Revelstoke, British Columbia, in October 1989; the province now has about 10 records, all but one of them from the interior. The first Washington record was from Walla Walla (Walla Walla County) in February 2000. Idaho&#8217;s first record came at Boise in November 1999 and is the only one accepted so far, although numerous other reports are under review by the state&#8217;s bird records committee. Oregon has a single accepted record, and California has more than 20. Washington&#8217;s 10 accepted records range from early September through mid-April. Nine of them are from the Columbia Basin, and the other is from Port Angeles (Clallam County).

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								lesser_black-backed_gull				
246	32	Larus	glaucescens	Glaucous-winged Gull	Common resident west. Uncommon east.	LC	The Glaucous-winged Gull is the most abundant and widespread gull in Washington. It is part of a complex of closely related gull species that interbreed readily. Western Gulls, Glaucous Gulls, Slaty-backed Gulls, and Herring Gulls all hybridize with Glaucous-winged Gulls, making the population of individual species somewhat difficult to determine. In Washington, Glaucus-winged Gulls most frequently hybridize with Western Gulls, and population estimates in the state include pure forms of both, as well as hybrids. The population in 1989 was estimated to be almost 37,000 birds. Population numbers have steadily increased in the last few decades around urban areas. Much of this increase has been attributed to the availability of garbage and fish waste. These population increases may be suppressing populations of many other seabirds on which Glaucous-winged Gulls prey. This issue needs more study and may require management of Glaucous-winged Gulls in the future.	The typical large gull of the Pacific Northwest, the Glaucous-winged Gull frequently hybridizes with other gulls and often displays intermediate plumage characteristics.  During the non-breeding season, the adult Glaucous-winged Gull has a solid gray-blue mantle (back and wings), a white tail, and a white head streaked with brown. The bill is very large. The wingtips are gray or gray-black, not deep black like many gull species. The underwings are white with a band of blue-gray. The legs are pink, and the beak is yellow with a red spot. The eye is dark brown, or rarely yellowish. During the breeding season, the head is pure white, and the eye has a fleshy pink eye-ring.  Like the other large gulls in Washington, the Glaucous-winged Gull is a 'four-year gull,' in that it takes four years to reach adult plumage. The juvenile is mottled brown with a dark eye and bill. This plumage varies and takes on more of the characteristics of adult plumage in each successive year. Identification of these gulls can be confusing, thus an advanced field guide and assistance from an experienced observer are highly beneficial for descriptions of hybrids and identification of gulls.		1	Glaucous-winged Gulls are commonly found in bays and estuaries, and on beaches and rocky shorelines. They also frequent freshwater lakes, agricultural fields, cities, and garbage dumps in coastal areas. They are sometimes found far offshore, well out of sight of land, but are less common far inland. Nesting habitat is mainly low, flat islands, with sandy, rocky, or gravel substrates. Building roofs in cities along Puget Sound have also been used as nesting habitat. Nests within Puget Sound are usually located in human-altered habitats, while nests along the coast are typically in natural settings.	The largest breeding colonies in the state are at Protection, Tatoosh, and Carroll Islands in Clallam County, Gunpowder Island in Pacific County, East Sand Island in the Columbia River estuary, Colville, Smith, and Minor Islands in San Juan County, and Destruction Island in Jefferson County.	Glaucous-winged Gulls forage in a variety of styles--while walking, flying, or swimming. Like other large gulls, they have been observed dropping shellfish onto rocks and other hard surfaces from far above in order to crack them open. They steal food from other seabirds and prey on young birds, especially those nesting nearby. Very bold, they will approach picnic tables and other human-occupied areas, scavenging and looking for handouts.	Omnivores, Glaucous-winged Gulls will eat most anything, but items most often ingested include fish and other marine creatures, small birds, eggs, small mammals, invertebrates from waterlogged fields, and refuse from dumps, sewage ponds, trash cans, and parking lots.	Common in Puget Trough near salt water and very local breeder along Columbia River in eastern Washington, although not yet recorded nesting as far upriver as Kittitas County. Nests in variety of habitats, including sandy islands, in cities on roofs, and on pilings. Confirmed BBA records limited to Seattle and Bremerton waterfronts, south shore of Bainbridge Island, and along Green River near Kent. Most locations mapped as possible can be assumed to represent birds foraging some distance away from nest sites. In 1980s, Garrett Eddy counted 200 nesting pairs on downtown Seattle buildings (Hunn 1982).	Glaucous-winged Gulls breed all along the coast of Washington (and less commonly in eastern Washington) in monogamous pairs that typically last for multiple breeding seasons. Nesting is usually in colonies, and birds first breed at four years of age. Nests are usually on the ground. The spot is scraped clean, and a ring of vegetation and nearby debris is built up. Sometimes more than one nest is started, but only one is completed and used. Both parents incubate the 2-3 eggs for about four weeks. Newborn chicks are covered in down and may leave the nest as soon as two days post-hatching, although they stay near the nest. Both parents feed the young, which first begin to fly at 5-7 weeks old, and leave the colony about 2 weeks afterwards.	In Washington, the Glaucous-winged Gull is present year round, although the young birds disperse farther than older birds after the breeding season. Some birds breeding in British Columbia and Alaska disperse southward along the coast in the winter.	glaucous-winged_gull	GWGU			
247	32	Larus	glaucoides	Iceland Gull		LC		The Iceland Gull closely resembles Thayer&#8217;s Gull&#8212;in fact, the two have often been treated as geographic races of a single, though variable, species. Adults of both have a pale gray mantle. A classic adult Iceland Gull has all-white primaries and yellow eyes, and resembles a smaller, delicately built version of a Glaucous Gull. The &#8220;typical&#8221; adult Thayer&#8217;s Gull has brown eyes and shows some black on the upperside of the primary tips. However, individual birds can and do exhibit much overlap in these characteristics.

Only one of the two subspecies of Iceland Gull is regularly found in Canada and the United States&#8212;<I>L.g. kumlieni</I>, commonly known as Kumlien&#8217;s Gull. (The other subspecies, <I>L.g. glaucoides</I>, breeds in southern Greenland and winters in North Atlantic Europe.) Kumlien&#8217;s Gull breeds in the eastern Canadian Arctic, east and south of Thayer&#8217;s Gull with which it sometimes hybridizes where their ranges meet. Most Kumlien&#8217;s Gulls winter in Atlantic Canada and New England, with some straying down the Atlantic Coast and to the Midwest and small numbers farther west. The pattern is the opposite for Thayer&#8217;s Gull, which winters primarily along the West Coast with small numbers ranging across the continent as far as the Atlantic Coast.

Identification of Iceland Gull is a predictably contentious issue whenever one is claimed to have occurred within the core wintering range of Thayer&#8217;s Gull. Objections invariably raised include the difficulty or impossibility of correctly identifying hybrids, pale extremes of Thayer&#8217;s Gull, and birds in immature plumage or showing heavy feather wear or fading, as well as possible confusion with small individuals of Glaucous Gull. The Washington Bird Records Committee has accepted 11 records of Iceland (Kumlien&#8217;s) Gull&#8212;five from the eastside and six from the westside&#8212;while denying eight others. Records committees in nearby states and provinces have been more hesitant. Oregon has just two accepted records, as does California. The Idaho committee has accepted none of the ten reports it has received, although several of these remain under review. British Columbia has had many reports of Iceland Gull, but the review status of the species in the province is unclear.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								iceland_gull				
248	32	Larus	heermanni	Heermann's Gull	Summer, fall visitor on coast.	NT	Heerman's Gulls are vulnerable to disturbance on their nesting islands, and fishermen sometimes harvest their eggs. Recently, it has been observed that they migrate to the Northwest earlier.	The Heerman's Gull is the size of a Ring-billed Gull, but stockier. It is unique in that its plumage is mostly dark. The Heerman's Gull has a dark gray back and wings with a lighter gray body. The head is white with a black-tipped red bill and a dark eye. The tail is black with a white terminal band. The wing has a white trailing edge and black tips. Some individuals have a white patch at the wrist. The feet are black. The Heerman's Gull is often mistaken for a jaeger. Non-breeding adults appear similar to breeding adults, but have a dark streaked head. Juveniles are solid brown overall in their first year and solid gray in their second year.  They reach maturity in their fourth year.		1	A Pacific species, the Heerman's Gull nests in western Mexico, and spends the non-breeding season in marine areas. A variety of coastal habitats, including rocky shores, bays, small offshore islands, kelp beds, sandy beaches, and estuaries, are all potential roosting sites. They seldom spend time at garbage dumps or on fresh water.	Common in coastal areas from June through October, Heerman's Gulls frequently congregate at the mouths of large rivers, and there are often large flocks at the mouth of the Columbia River. They can also be found in the Strait of Juan de Fuca and the San Juan Islands.  They are fairly regular in Puget Sound in small numbers.	While large roosting flocks are seen, Heerman's Gulls are rarely seen flying in large flocks. These gulls are aggressive, chasing other seabirds, especially Brown Pelicans, and stealing food from them.	Fish and other small marine creatures make up the majority of the diet. Eggs, other birds, refuse, and carrion are also eaten, although Heerman's Gulls eat less refuse and carrion than do most other gull species.		Heerman's Gulls breed in early spring in large colonies on islands off the west Mexican coast. Nests are located on level ground, a shallow scrape in the soil lightly lined with feathers, grass, or weeds. Both parents incubate the 2-3 eggs for about 4 weeks, and both feed the young. Age at first flight is not known.	In late May, after their early breeding season, Heerman's Gulls migrate north along the Pacific Coast. Their migration coincides with that of the Brown Pelican, from whom they often steal food. They arrive in the Northwest in mid-summer and stay through the fall, when they return to Mexico to breed. Some may also disperse south from the breeding grounds along the Mexican Coast.	heermanns_gull	HEEG			
249	32	Larus	hyperboreus	Glaucous Gull	Rare winter resident.	LC	Glaucous Gulls are widespread and common in the far north where they are protected from human activities due to the remoteness. High Arctic habitats are slow to rebound from degradation, and these areas should be protected to maintain the population at its current healthy level. Populations in the eastern Bering Sea hybridize with Glaucous-winged Gulls.	An inhabitant of the far north, the Glaucous Gull is a large, pale gull with a large bill. The adult appears very white. Its back and wings are light gray, and the wingtips are white, with no black on the wing. The tail is white. The legs are pink, and the eyes are yellow. The bill is yellow with a red spot. In the non-breeding season, the adult's head is streaked with brown. Birds in breeding plumage have pure white heads and fleshy yellow eye-rings.  The Glaucous Gull may be confused with the Glaucous-winged Gull, with which it hybridizes. Like most of the large gulls, this is a '4-year gull,' meaning that it takes 4 years to reach adult plumage, with a different sub-adult plumage each year. Juveniles are mostly white with buff markings. The first-year plumage is distinguished from that of a Glaucous-winged Gull by the distinctly bi-colored bill with a dark tip and a flesh-pink base. This plumage is the one most commonly seen in Washington.		1	The Glaucous Gull is the only large gull common in the high Arctic. It inhabits cold, coastal bays, estuaries, and offshore areas. In winter, Glaucous Gulls have been found on large inland lakes. Nesting habitat is mainly cliff ledges, islands, and beaches. Foraging habitat includes garbage dumps, fish-processing plants, harbors, mud flats, sewage lagoons, flooded fields, and fish-spawning areas.	The Glaucous Gull is a rare winter visitor in all lowland regions of Washington, found in both fresh and salt water and along sandy and rocky shorelines. West of the Cascades, you can see Glaucous Gulls from mid-November to mid-May. The Elwha River (Clallam County) and the Nisqually Delta (Pierce County) are areas with large congregations of gulls. Look carefully for Glaucous Gulls in the flocks. Between mid-November and March, they can be found east of the Cascades on Banks Lake in Grand Coulee (Grant County). Usually, single birds are found with large flocks of other gulls, and most are first- or second-year birds.	The Glaucous Gull usually associates with flocks of other roosting and feeding gulls such as Glaucous-winged and Herring Gulls.  A predator and a scavenger, the Glaucous Gull will steal food from other birds. It forages while flying, walking, or swimming. In flight, it picks items off the surface of the water and may catch smaller birds.	Glaucous Gulls eat fish and other aquatic creatures, as well as insects, birds, eggs, berries, carrion, and garbage.		Pairs nest in colonies or alone on cliff tops, flat, rocky ground, ice, or snow. Both adults help build the nest, which is a mound of vegetation and miscellaneous debris, depressed in the center. Both incubate the 3 eggs for about 4 weeks. Both parents feed the downy chicks for close to 2 months. The young leave the nest on foot a few days after hatching, and they stay close to the nest until their first flight at 45-50 days, soon after which they become independent.	Some, mostly younger, birds leave the Arctic and move south for the winter, heading down either coast of North America, or to the Great Lakes. Many remain as far north as there is open water through the winter.	glaucous_gull				
250	32	Larus	marinus	Great Black-backed Gull		LC		Although variable in size, the Great Black-backed Gull is on average the largest of all gulls, with some individuals weighing more than five pounds. In adult plumage, attained in four years, it has a large head and heavy bill, yellow eye (usually), and light pink legs. Its dark gray-black mantle is darker than that of any other gull likely to be seen in Washington. However, in immature plumages this species is less easily separated from other large gulls, especially Herring Gull. Consult field guides for the fine points.

This North Atlantic native breeds from the Arctic to the Carolinas, the Great Lakes, Britain, France, and the Baltic Sea, with some southward movement in winter to the Gulf Coast, the Caribbean, and the Iberian Peninsula. In recent years small numbers of birds have been straying farther and farther westward in North America. There are now four records from the Pacific Northwest and Alaska. The first, an adult, came at Kamloops, British Columbia, in December 1988. The second was a second-winter bird at Kodiak, Alaska, in February 1995. The third was a first-winter bird found at Boise, Idaho, in December 2003. The fourth came a month later in Washington, when a second-winter bird was discovered at the mouth of the Cedar River in Renton (King County), in January 2004.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								great_black-backed_gull				
251	32	Larus	minutus	Little Gull	Rare migrant and winter west.	LC	How the Little Gull ended up in North America is unknown. Some argue that it has always occurred here in small numbers. Others claim that it colonized by way of the Bering Sea. A third theory is that Little Gulls came across the Atlantic. The first known record of a Little Gull in North America is from 1820, and the first nesting record is from 1962. As of 1999, there had been only 67 confirmed or probable nesting reports documented in North America. Most of these were in wetlands in the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River regions. The first appearance in Washington was in the fall of 1974. It has now been recorded up and down the West Coast throughout the year. The nesting population in North America may not be self-sustaining, and is supplemented by an influx of European vagrants.	The smallest of the gulls, the Little Gull has a short, narrow bill, red legs, and a short tail. In breeding plumage, the adult has a dark hood with a black eye and bill. Non-breeding plumage is similar, but the head is white, smudged with black, with a black ear-spot behind the eye. The body coloration is typical of gull plumage from above, but both breeding and non-breeding adults have dark underwings with pale wingtips, which are distinctive in flight. Juveniles are mottled dark brown, mixed with varying degrees of adult plumage characteristics.  In flight, juveniles have a dark 'W' across the underwing.		1	Breeding habitat is mostly inland around low-lying marshy areas near lakes. Winter habitat is along coasts in protected shallow estuaries, mudflats, and beaches, and nearby fresh water lakes.	In Washington, sightings of the Little Gull are rare and occur primarily in the fall (September-November) in coastal and western Washington regions in aquatic habitats. Look for them in mixed flocks with Bonaparte&#39;s Gulls. American Lake near Fort Lewis (Pierce County) and Point No Point (Kitsap County) are traditional sites for this species.	Lone Little Gulls are often found amidst flocks of Bonaparte's Gulls and terns. They often forage in flight, flying slowly low over the water and dropping down to pluck items from the surface. They also land on the water and feed from a swimming or wading position.	In the summer, small insects make up the majority of the diet. Small crustaceans, mollusks, small fish, and other aquatic creatures round out the diet the rest of the year.		A primarily Eurasian species, where they breed in colonies, Little Gulls in North America usually nest in small colonies or isolated pairs. Nests are on the ground, near water. Both sexes help build a nest of grass, weeds, and leaves with a shallow depression in the middle. Both help incubate the 2 to 3 eggs for about 3½ weeks. Both parents help tend the young, which leave the nest shortly after hatching, but stay close by. Three to four weeks later, they fledge.	Migratory movements in North America are not well known.	little_gull				
252	32	Larus	occidentalis	Western Gull	Common resident on coast. Rare east.	LC	The Western Gull is limited in distribution with a smaller population size than most other North American gulls, with a total population of only 40,000 pairs worldwide, limited to about 200 colonies. The number of Western Gulls in Washington is difficult to determine because of their extensive hybridization with Glaucous-winged Gulls in this state. Some say that the population is stable or increasing.  Others claim that the Western Gull is one of the most limited North American Gulls in range and population numbers, and may become a species of concern if the current practice of management decisions favoring other species over Western Gulls continues.	The adult Western Gull has a deep gray back and wings, with black wing-tips that blend into the rest of the wing, unlike many species where the black is clearly defined. The underwing is white with a narrow band of gray. The head is mostly white, with a limited amount of brown streaking, especially in non-breeding plumage. The large bill is yellow with a red spot, and the eye is dark yellow. Like the other large gulls in Washington, the Western Gull is a four-4 year gull, meaning that it takes four years to achieve adult plumage. Juveniles are mottled brown, with a dark bill and dark eyes, and pinkish-gray legs. This plumage varies and takes on more of the adult plumage characteristics in each successive year. At the northern extent of their breeding range in Washington, Western Gulls frequently hybridize with Glaucous-winged Gulls and often display intermediate plumage characteristics, leading to identification confusion between these and other large gulls found here. An advanced field guide and assistance from an experienced observer are highly beneficial for descriptions of hybrids and identification of gulls.		1	Western Gulls are found mostly near the coast, and also found regularly offshore. They are not typically found far inland. Many types of habitats are used, including estuaries, beaches, fields, garbage dumps, and city waterfronts. Nest sites are often located on rocky, sandy, or gravel islands, or inaccessible mainland cliffs.	Western Gulls are common in all seasons along the Washington coast. The northern edge of the breeding range of pure Western Gulls is at Tatoosh Island in Washington, and south of Grays Harbor, most of the gulls are pure Western Gulls. Many of the birds breeding in Grays Harbor are hybrids. The hybrid zone extends farther to the north, but not into British Columbia. Large colonies of Western Gulls can be found at Grays Harbor, Willapa Bay, and the mouth of the Columbia River. Western Gulls have been recorded east of the Cascades, but are predominantly seen on the coast.	Opportunistic, the Western Gull will steal unguarded eggs or chicks of other species, near which they often locate their nesting colonies. They will also situate colonies near sea lion breeding colonies and scavenge dead pups. Western Gulls, like many other gull species, drop hard-shelled items from the air to break them on hard surfaces. In very hot weather, adults may cool their eggs with their wet belly feathers.	Western Gulls are omnivores and eat a variety of things including fish and other aquatic creatures, eggs, carrion, garbage, and other birds.		Western Gulls nest in colonies on islands, offshore rocks, and abandoned piers. Colonies are often located near nesting seabirds or sea lions. Birds first breed at the age of 4 years. Nests are built on the ground, and the pair often starts as many as three nests, and then chooses one to finish and use. The nest is often located next to a rock or other object that provides protection from the wind and a visual barrier from neighbors. The nest is a substantial mound built from nearby vegetation and debris. The female usually lays 3 eggs.  (Nests with more than three eggs are the result of multiple females.) Both members of the pair incubate the eggs for about a month. A few days after hatching, the young may leave the nest but won't go far, often hiding in nearby vegetation. At 6 to 7 weeks of age, they begin to fly, but don't become independent from their parents and depart the colony until they are 10 weeks or older.	Western Gulls are present year round throughout the breeding range, although birds wander widely within this range.	western_gull	WEGU			
253	32	Larus	philadelphia	Bonaparte's Gull	Common migrant west, rare east.	LC	Numbers appear to be stable. The nesting grounds of Bonaparte's Gulls are very remote, and thus they have not been harmed by human disturbance.	The smallest gull seen over most of North America, the Bonaparte's Gull is often described as delicate and tern-like in flight. This gull has narrow wings, a slender, black, pin-like bill, and pink legs. It has a light slate-gray back, with a black line down the trailing edge of the outer wing, and a white belly. The leading edges on the upper surfaces of the outer wing are white. In breeding plumage, the adult has a black head and an incomplete white eye-ring.  Non-breeding adults lack the black hood. The adult's head is white with dark smudges and a dark ear-spot.   Dark markings on the wings of the juvenile look like a narrow, dark 'M' across its back in flight.  Bonaparte's Gulls reach maturity when they are two years old.		1	Bonaparte's Gulls breed at the edge of the northern forest in areas with coniferous trees adjacent to lakes, marshes, or bogs. During migration and in winter, they frequent bodies of water, including rivers, lakes, sewage ponds, estuaries, and open ocean.	Bonaparte's Gulls are commonly found during the winter in coastal areas throughout Washington, and as migrants in lowlands east and west of the Cascades. During these times they are common in salt-water, sandy-shore, and fresh-water habitats. In winter, large flocks can be found in inner coastal areas, such as the Strait of Juan de Fuca. The mouth of the Columbia River, the Tacoma Narrows, Seattle's Green Lake, and Point No Point (Kitsap County) are all spots where Bonaparte's Gulls can regularly be seen.	Bonaparte's Gulls generally forage in single-species flocks, but are commonly seen in the same spot as many other gull species.  They do not frequent garbage dumps, but often feed at sewage lagoons. They use a variety of foraging strategies, including dropping into the water from the air, picking up items while swimming or wading, and catching insects in mid-air. They often occur in tight feeding aggregations with peak numbers corresponding closely to density of fish.  They are subject to kleptoparasitism by Parasitic Jaegers.	On nesting grounds, insects are the primary prey of the Bonaparte's Gull. In coastal areas during the non-breeding season, fish, krill and other marine creatures make up a large portion of their diet. In a study of the effect of fish-eating birds on Chinook salmon fry, Bonaparte's Gulls were the most efficient predators of the ten species studied.		Bonaparte's Gulls nest singly or in loose colonies located on islands or lakeshores. They are unusual among the gulls in that they usually nest in trees rather than on the ground. Spruce is the most common choice for nesting, and nests are built of small twigs, moss, lichen, grass, and other herbaceous vegetation. Nests are typically situated 4-15 feet off the ground on a horizontal branch. The female lays three eggs, which both sexes incubate for about 24 days. Both parents help feed the young. Fledging age is not known.	Nesting in north central Canada, Bonaparte's Gulls move east or west towards the nearest coast in the fall. This migration typically starts in late July and lasts through November, with the adults migrating before the immature birds. In the winter, flocks may move about in response to food supplies. The spring migration of breeding adults begins in late March or early April, and lasts through mid-May. Younger birds, not yet of breeding age, migrate from late May through June.	bonapartes_gull	BOGU			
254	32	Larus	pipixcan	Franklin's Gull	Rare migrant.	LC	Despite being highly susceptible to human disturbance and habitat loss, the Franklin's Gull populations seem to be stable. The Breeding Bird Survey has shown apparent declines in the past 25 years, but there is much speculation that this species does not lend itself to being studied in this manner. Managers on national wildlife refuges, where many of the colonies are located, report large fluctuations between years, but little evidence of a decrease in overall population. In fact, many recent range expansions have been reported, especially in the Pacific Northwest. In British Columbia, breeding season sightings have been reported, but no nesting colony has yet been found. The first breeding in Oregon was recorded in 1943, and the colony has been gradually increasing since then, with 1,330 pairs recorded at Malheur in 1981.	A small, hooded gull, the Franklin's Gull is uncommon in Washington. Its wings and back are dark gray, contrasting with a white tail, belly, and neck, red legs, and black wingtips. In breeding plumage, the adult's head is solid black with a deep red bill and a black ring. The eye is characterized by white crescents above and below it.  In non-breeding plumage, the head of the adult is white smudged with black. Juveniles are mottled-brown mixed with varying degrees of adult plumage characteristics. It is the only gull that goes through a complete molt in both the fall and the spring.		1	The Franklin's Gull is a common nesting gull of the northern Great Plains, nesting in extensive prairie marshes. Since the condition of these marshes is variable from year to year, it is not unusual for entire colonies to shift location annually. In winter, Franklin's Gulls leave North America for more southern coastal regions, concentrating in protected bays and estuaries. Winter habitat also includes agricultural fields, inland lakes, and offshore waters.	Uncommon anytime, Franklin's Gulls are most likely to be seen in Washington between late summer and early November, during the pre-migratory wandering stage.  In recent years, they have been more regular in late spring, into June. Salt-water, sandy-shore and fresh-water habitats in coastal areas, and lowlands east and west of the Cascades, are all possible areas for sightings. In eastern Washington, Franklin's Gulls can be seen in the spring, most likely straying from the breeding colony at Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon. Franklin's Gulls are also sometimes seen at sewage ponds (Everett in Snohomish County and Hoquiam in Grays Harbor County) in the fall. They have also become more common in recent years in the early fall on the northern coast and bays of Washington and southwestern British Columbia.	Franklin's Gulls are often found in flocks with Bonaparte's or Mew Gulls.  Flocks are often seen following plows in agricultural fields. The gulls also forage while walking on the ground, wading, and swimming.	Insects and other invertebrates make up the majority of the summer diet. In winter, aquatic prey items such as fish and crustaceans are more common.		Flexible colony nesters, Franklin's Gulls shift their large colonies (up to thousands of pairs) from year to year, depending on nest conditions. Nests are floating masses of rushes, cattails, and grasses built in water up to several feet deep and usually attached to emergent vegetation. Franklin's Gulls form monogamous pair bonds for the duration of the nesting season and probably start breeding at the age of two years. Both members of the pair help build the nest and incubate the 3 eggs for about 23-26 days. Both parents feed the young and brood them, taking turns so that one parent is present at all times. The young remain in the nest for about three weeks, and after that may swim around the nest, not straying far. First flight is at a little over a month, and they continue to be fed by the parents until at least another week after that. As the floating nest decays from underneath, it slowly sinks, and the birds must add to it throughout the nesting season to maintain it.	A strongly migratory species, the Franklin's Gull spends the winter south of the equator along the west coast of Central and South America. Spring migration is a fairly direct trip from the wintering grounds to the breeding grounds. The closest breeding colony to Washington is at Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon, where the birds arrive in late April or early May. After the breeding season, the gulls begin a protracted period of wandering throughout their range. This wandering lasts from mid- to late July and continues until September or early October, when they begin to migrate southward.	franklins_gull	FRGU			
255	32	Larus	ridibundus	Black-headed Gull		LC		A widespread Eurasian resident, the Black-headed Gull has increased in numbers and extended its range during the last century. It now winters regularly in small numbers, and has bred, in Atlantic Canada and the northeastern United States. Elsewhere in North America it is a rare visitor, mostly along the coasts. Of the commonly seen gulls in Washington, Black-headed most closely resembles Bonaparte&#8217;s but is significantly larger with a longer, heavier red (not black) bill. In flight, the upperwing shows a white wedge, similar to Bonaparte&#8217;s, but the dark primaries visible on the underwing are a distinctive field mark. The adult in breeding plumage has a dark brown hood, red legs, and a pale gray mantle. In winter the head is white with a prominent dark spot behind the eye. Black-headed Gull and Bonaparte&#8217;s Gull both attain full adult plumage in two years; see field guides for the immature plumages.

In Washington, Black-headed Gull is a casual fall migrant and winter resident on and near marine waters. The 12 accepted records range in date from mid-August to early April with a strong peak in early fall. British Columbia has more than a dozen records, the majority of them from the Greater Victoria area. Oregon has three records, California more than 20.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								black-headed_gull				
256	32	Larus	schistisagus	Slaty-backed Gull		LC		This rare winter visitor is the same size as the Western Gull, which it also resembles in structure and general appearance. The adult has pink legs and a mantle a shade darker than our local race of Western Gull&#8217;s, although mantle color can be tricky to judge under field conditions. The head, neck, and upper breast are streaked in winter, whereas those of the Western Gull remain immaculate white (but beware of Western Gull x Glaucous-winged Gull hybrids, common in western Washington, which may have variable amounts of streaking in winter plumage). The eye of the adult Slaty-backed is usually but not always pale, rather like Herring Gull&#8217;s, while that of our northern race of Western Gull is usually but not always dark. In flight, the adult Slaty-backed shows less black, and more white, in the wingtips than Western and a relatively broader white trailing edge of the wing. [N.B.: The above descriptions are oversimplified. Field guides should be consulted&#8212;even more so for the immature plumages of the first three years of the bird&#8217;s life.]

A coastal resident of the northwest Pacific, the Slaty-backed Gull breeds from Siberia to northern Japan and winters from Japan south to Taiwan and east through the Bering Sea region to Alaska. Small numbers have bred in Alaska in recent years, and the species now shows up regularly in winter farther south along the West Coast. Washington&#8217;s first record was in 1986. The state now has 10 accepted records between mid-December and mid-March. All are from the Puget Lowlands, often at river mouths. Oregon has several records along the lower Columbia River, and Slaty-backed Gull is now annual in British Columbia.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								slaty-backed_gull				
257	32	Larus	thayeri	Thayer's Gull	Fairly common winter resident.	LC	The nesting range of the Thayer's Gull has been protected from human impact due to its remoteness. No obvious population trends have been observed although more study is needed. There is still debate about whether the Thayer's Gull is truly a separate species, or if it is a subspecies of Iceland Gull.  Some estimates have placed the breeding population at 8,000-12,000 birds, while others claim it is much greater, underestimated due to misidentification.	The Thayer's Gull is a large gull, with typical gull-like plumage. Until 1972, it was considered a subspecies of Herring Gull, but is once again classified as a full species. The adult is solid slate-gray on its backs and wings, with black on the outer edges of the wings. The undersides of the wings are pale. The trailing edge of the wing is white, and the legs are pink. White in the breeding season, its head is brown and dirty-looking in the non-breeding season. Immature birds sport a variety of plumages with varying degrees of mottled brown and white mixed with adult plumage characteristics.  Thayer's Gulls mature in four years.		1	During the breeding season, Thayer's Gulls inhabit the Canadian high Arctic, nesting on rocky coastlines of islands. In winter, they can be found around bodies of water near the coast, including estuaries and protected bays. They also spend time far offshore, on freshwater ponds, and garbage dumps near the coast.	Thayer's Gulls are regular migrants and winter residents in Washington from October to March in offshore, coastal, and the Puget Trough regions. They are uncommon in April and early May, and are usually absent from mid-May until September. In winter, they can also be seen around the lower Columbia River and the Willamette Valley. The Port of Tacoma area and Ediz Hook at Port Angeles are excellent places to look for Thayer's Gulls. Agricultural areas and garbage dumps are good inland spots to look for them. In late February and early March, hundreds are attracted to the smelt runs on the lower Columbia River.	Thayer's Gulls forage while swimming, walking, or flying. When foraging in flight, they drop to the water's surface or plunge just below it.	Omnivores, Thayer's Gulls eat small fish, crustaceans, mollusks, carrion, eggs, young birds, and garbage.		The breeding characteristics of the Thayer's Gull are not well known. They probably start breeding at four years of age. Typical of gulls, they nest in colonies, often mixed with other gull species. The nest is located on the ledge of a rocky island cliff. Both sexes help build the nest, which is a low mound of plant material, matted down in the middle. The female usually lays 2, or occasionally 3, eggs, and both sexes help incubate the eggs and feed the young. Incubation and fledging periods are not known.	Most Thayer's Gulls nest in the central Canadian Arctic and move southwest to the Pacific coast in winter. The main migration of Thayer's Gulls through Washington in the fall occurs in September, with wintering numbers peaking in December and January. Washington and southern British Columbia are the core of their winter range. They begin leaving for their Arctic breeding grounds in late March, and by May, most are gone from our area.	thayers_gull	THGU			
258	24	Leucosticte	tephrocotis	Gray-crowned Rosy-Finch	Uncommon resident.	LC	Two subspecies of Gray-crowned Rosy-Finch are found in Washington.  One both breeds and winters in Washington, and the other, which has less gray on its head, breeds in Alaska and probably the Canadian Rockies, then moves into Washington in winter.  Although Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches are not often seen, they are widespread.  The population appears relatively stable, and much of their breeding range is very remote and thus protected from human disturbance.	Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches are medium-to-large finches with long wings and tails.  In the Cascades subspecies most commonly found in Washington, heads are almost entirely gray with black forecrowns, and bodies are dark brown with a rose-colored wash, especially on the wings.  Flight feathers appear pale from below, and this 'frosted' appearance of the underwings helps identify Rosy-Finches as they fly about mountain cliffs. Juveniles look quite different from adults, with light gray to gray brown bodies, no black forecrowns, and no rosy wash.  Juveniles also have creamy-buff wing-bars and patches.		1	Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches may breed at the highest altitude of any breeding bird in North America.  Their typical breeding habitat is rocky talus and snowfields near sedge and grassy areas.  They often breed near moist seeps, and are always associated with rocks.  In winter they inhabit open lowland areas, including canyons, wheat fields, and grasslands.	Because their habitat is largely inaccessible, Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches are hard to find in the breeding season.  They occur from mid-April to mid-October above 6,500 feet in the Olympics and above 6,000 feet in the Cascades. In the Olympics they are limited to the highest peaks, including Mount Olympus, Mount Carrie, The Needles, Mount Deception, and Mount Anderson.  In the Cascades, they are most common north of Snoqualmie Pass, although they also breed on Mount Rainier, Mount Adams, and in the Goat Rocks Wilderness Area.  Before the 1980 eruption they also bred on Mount St. Helens.  From late October to mid-May, they are most often found east of the Cascades, especially at Grand Coulee and Moses Coulee. They are sometimes seen on gravel along roadsides. Their numbers can vary considerably from year to year, but they are always considered uncommon or rare.  During migration they may be found along the barren ridges of the shrub-steppe zone, or gathering into pre-migration flocks in mountainous areas.  Look for them during this time at Sunrise on Mount Rainier.  They are also occasionally found in the lowlands of western Washington during migration and in winter.	Outside of the breeding season, Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches form large flocks, sometimes with with Snow Buntings, Lapland Longspurs, and/or Horned Larks. They are ground-feeders that walk along the ground or snow, especially the edges of melting snow, looking for food.  They are typically quite unafraid of humans. During the winter they sometimes roost in old Cliff Swallow nests at night.	In summer, Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches eat insects, especially cutworms and other insects that get caught in updrafts and then are deposited on snow, where they freeze.  During winter, these finches eat seeds, especially Russian thistle, wild grass, mustard, and sunflower seeds.  In the breeding season, Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches develop throat pouches that allow them to carry food back to their young at the nest.	Local and uncommon breeder along Cascade crest in high alpine habitat north of Snoqualmie Pass. Probably under-recorded by BBA teams due to access difficulties to core habitat. Nests in rockslides and cavities in cliffs above tree line. Breeding race in Cascades, <i>L.t. littoralis</i>, sometimes treated as separate species (Hepburn's Rosy-Finch).	Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches are monogamous. They nest in rock crevices, along cliff ledges, and under overhanging rocks.  Typically, the nest is totally hidden from view.  Although both sexes collect nesting material, only the female builds the nest, a bulky cup of grass, rootlets, lichen, moss, and sedge, lined with fine grass, hair, and feathers.  The female typically incubates 3 to 5 eggs for about 14 days.  Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest after 15 to 22 days and follow their parents to forage.  The young are fed by their parents for two to three weeks after fledging.	In autumn, when the snow cover gets deep, Gray-crowned Rosy-Finches migrate in flocks to the lowlands.  In early spring, even when their breeding grounds are still deeply covered with snow, they leave the lowlands and return to their alpine breeding grounds.	gray-crowned_rosy-finch				
259	57	Limnodromus	griseus	Short-billed Dowitcher	Common migrant on coast. Rare east.	LC	Until 1950, Short-billed and Long-bill Dowitchers were considered a single species.  The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population of Short-billed Dowitchers at 320,000, spread across North America as three subspecies.  The same estimate numbers the western subspecies at 150,000 birds.  The Short-billed Dowitcher is listed as a species of concern on the Partners in Flight watch list and is reported to be declining.	The Short-billed Dowitcher is very similar in appearance to the Long-billed Dowitcher.  Both birds are large shorebirds. In breeding plumage, they are reddish underneath and mottled-brown above. In flight, they show a pale trailing edge on their wings and a distinctive white blaze up their backs, which easily identifies them as dowitchers.  The distinction between the two species is not as simple.  The female of both species has a longer bill than the male, and the bill of the female Short-billed is the same length of that of the male Long-billed, so bill length can be confusing.   Short-billeds in breeding plumage usually have some spotting rather than barring on the sides of their breasts in front of the wings. Long-billeds are usually barred.  The belly of the Long-billed is typically reddish all the way back, and the Short-billed often has some white on the belly.  Juvenile Short-billeds are brighter than Long-billeds, with light edging and internal rufous markings on the tertial feathers.  Long-billed juveniles are drabber and darker than Short-billeds.  Non-breeding plumage is very difficult to distinguish. Range, habitat, and vocalizations should all be used to help distinguish between these two species.		1	During migration and winter, Short-billed Dowitchers are usually found in salt water on mud flats and tidal marshes.  They can sometimes be found on fresh water at the muddy edges of ponds, but are less likely on fresh water than Long-billeds.  They breed in open marshes and bogs in the boreal forest zone, usually inland, but close to fresh water.	This common, coastal migrant may number in the tens of thousands in Grays Harbor during the spring migration peak.  Willapa Bay is another major stopover point in spring.  These two sites are the only spots where large numbers usually congregate in the spring, but smaller numbers may be scattered in other spots along Washington's outer coast as well. The spring influx of birds usually starts with a few birds at the end of March, and lasts into early May.  They are common from early April to early May, peaking at the end of April.  By mid-May, they have tapered off considerably and are rarely seen.  By late June, they start becoming more common as the fall migration begins. The peak southerly movement of adults is from the end of June to mid-July, with numbers tapering off and blending into the August and early September peak migration juveniles. Numbers vary greatly, and in some years, fewer than a thousand birds are counted. The birds that migrate through Washington breed in Alaska and winter on the Pacific Coast south of Washington. Some first-year birds stay on the wintering grounds, or migrate only as far as Washington for the summer. Migrants in eastern Washington are never common. They can be seen occasionally in spring, and rarely in fall, at large wetlands in the Columbia Basin.  While some birds summer at Grays Harbor and Willapa Bay, wintering birds are very unusual, and care should be taken not to misidentify Long-billed Dowitchers, which are much more common in Washington in winter.	Short-billed Dowitchers can often be found in very large, dense flocks. They feed by probing their long bills into mud or shallow water. Their bills are full of nerve endings, useful for sensing prey.  They walk along slowly, lifting their heads up and down like a sewing machine.  The call is a sharp, low, two-syllable whistle, easily distinguished from the high peeping of the Long-billed.	On the breeding grounds, Short-billed Dowitchers eat insects and insect larvae. On mudflats, they also eat mollusks, crustaceans, marine worms, and other aquatic invertebrates.		Short-billed Dowitchers nest in northern Canada and Alaska.  Nests are usually located on the ground near water. The nest is a shallow scrape in a clump of moss or grass, lined with twigs, leaves, or grass.  Both parents incubate the four eggs for about 21 days.  The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and find their own food. Both parents help tend the young, but the female may abandon the group early. The male probably stays with the young until they are close to fledging.	Short-billed Dowitchers migrate medium to long distances. Many winter along the US, Central American, and South American coasts. The western race that passes through Washington stays close to the Pacific coast during its travels.	short-billed_dowitcher				
260	57	Limnodromus	scolopaceus	Long-billed Dowitcher	Common migrant. Uncommon winter, mostly west.	LC	Until 1950 Short-billed and Long-billed Dowitchers were considered a single species.  The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population of Long-billed Dowitchers at 500,000.  While they are not abundant anywhere in Washington, they are fairly common and widespread.  Over-hunting contributed to declines in the late 1800s and early 1900s, but protection from hunting has resulted in a rebound.  Range-wide, the number of migrants has increased, and the breeding population has recently expanded into Siberia. It is not fully understood whether this is a shift from other nesting areas, or a true expansion.  Habitat loss and environmental contaminants also threaten the current population of Long-billed Dowitchers.	The Long-billed Dowitcher is very similar in appearance to the Short-billed Dowitcher.  Both birds are medium to large shorebirds. In breeding plumage, they are reddish underneath and mottled brown above. In flight, they show a pale trailing edge on their wings and a distinctive white blaze up their backs, which easily identifies them as dowitchers.  The distinction between the two species is not as simple.  The female of both species has a longer bill than the male, and the bill of the female Short-billed is the same length of that of the male Long-billed, so bill length can be confusing.  The Long-billed in breeding plumage usually has some barring rather than spotting on the side of its breast in front of the wing. The Short-billed is usually spotted.  The belly of the Long-billed is typically reddish all the way back, while the Short-billed often has some white on its belly.  The juvenile Short-billed is brighter than the Long-billed, with light edging on its feathers. The Short-billed juvenile has bright edging and internal markings on the tertial feathers. The Long-billed juvenile is drabber and darker than the Short-billed.  Non-breeding plumage is very difficult to distinguish. Range, habitat, and vocalizations should all be used to help distinguish between these two species.		1	During migration and winter, Long-billed Dowitchers are usually found on fresh water marshes and sometimes in coastal areas.  They are often found on drying lakeshores.  In coastal habitats, they are usually in small pools with salt-marsh vegetation.  They breed farther north and west than Short-billeds, in grass- or sedge-dominated tundra marshes in Arctic coastal regions in Alaska.	The Long-billed Dowitcher is less common during migration than the Short-billed Dowitcher, but is the more common winter resident in major estuaries on the Washington coast and in Puget Sound.  It is generally absent from eastern Washington in winter. Coastally, the first adult migrants start arriving from the north in July and are common from July into mid-September. Juveniles start migrating through in mid-August and are common through October. They are uncommon from November through April. The spring migration is short, and birds are common for only a few weeks in the beginning of May. They taper off to uncommon in late May, and by June they are reported only occasionally.  In eastern Washington, they are rare in late June, but quickly become common in July and remain so through October.  They are uncommon in November, rare in December, and only occasionally spotted from January through March. In April, numbers start migrating through again, but they are still uncommon. The migration builds in May, and they are common for most of that month. This is a short period, and by the end of May they are uncommon, and by the second half of June they are rarely reported.	Long-billed Dowitchers are usually found in smaller flocks than Short-billeds, but huge flocks of Short-billed Dowitchers often include a few Long-billed Dowitchers.  Long-billed Dowitchers feed by probing their long bills into mud or shallow water. Their bills are full of nerve endings, useful for sensing prey.  They walk along slowly, lifting their heads up and down like a sewing machine. The call is a high peeping sound, usually a single call, but sometimes repeated.	On the breeding grounds, Long-billed Dowitchers eat insects and insect larvae. On mudflats they also eat mollusks, crustaceans, marine worms, and other aquatic invertebrates.		Long-billed Dowitchers usually nest on the ground near water.  The nest itself is a fairly deep scrape in a clump of moss or grass, lined with sedge or grass.  The bottom of the nest is often damp.  Both parents incubate the four eggs for 21 to 22 days.  The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and find their own food. Both parents help tend the young at first, but the female may abandon the group soon after they hatch.  The male probably stays with the young until they are close to fledging at 20-30 days.  Each pair raises a single brood per year.	Long-billed Dowitchers migrate medium distances, not as far as Short-billeds.  They come through Washington later in the fall than their shorter-billed relatives, and they winter along the Atlantic and Pacific Coasts.  Some first-year birds stay on the wintering grounds in summer.	long-billed_dowitcher	LBDO			
261	57	Limosa	fedoa	Marbled Godwit	Uncommon migrant and winter coast. Rare east.	LC	Marbled Godwits breed in Canada and the interior and north-central area of the United States.  The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population at 171,500 birds. They were common in the 1800s, but were over-hunted in the early 1900s. Protection from hunting has helped the population rebound, but the destruction of grassland breeding habitat now limits the population.	Marbled Godwits are large shorebirds with slightly upturned bills.  They are mottled brown with cinnamon underwings that are distinctive in flight.  In winter, they are plain underneath, but during the breeding season they have dark barring on their breasts and bellies.		1	They nest in native prairie habitats: wet meadows and grassy areas near water.  During migration and winter, they are coastal, foraging on mudflats, salt marshes, estuaries, and coastal pools.	Marbled Godwits are most likely to be seen in protected estuaries along the outer coast, from Grays Harbor south, from April to early May, and from July into October.  Birds seen later in the fall, from September to October, are usually juveniles.  Large flocks often feed on the golf course in Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) in the spring.  A flock also winters regularly at Tokeland in Willapa Bay (Pacific County).  Other possible sites are Blaine (Whatcom County) and Sequim (Clallam County).	Marbled Godwits are commonly seen in flocks with Whimbrels and Long-billed Curlews, both large and brown like the Marbled Godwit.  The Marbled Godwit moves slowly, probing for food under the mud with its sensitive bill.  It often inserts its entire bill into the mud, and its head is totally submerged at times.	In summer, Marbled Godwits eat insects, roots, and seeds. During migration, they may forage almost exclusively on tubers.  In coastal areas, they eat mollusks, crustaceans, and other aquatic creatures that live in the sand and mud.		Marbled Godwits form loose colonies without obvious territorial boundaries.  To attract a female, the male performs a high, circling flight display, followed by a steep dive.  The male selects a nest site in a dry spot with short grass and starts a shallow scrape. If the female approves it, both will add grass, and sometimes a canopy of grass is arched over the nest.  Both parents incubate the four eggs for 24 to 26 days. The young leave the nest soon after hatching and find their own food. Both parents protect and tend the young for the first 15 to 26 days, after which the female usually leaves.  The male stays with the young until they can fly.	Most Marbled Godwits winter in coastal California or Mexico, and some range as far as South America. They migrate in flocks, with juveniles following a few weeks behind the adults. Birds migrate south through Washington in late August through mid-September, and return to the breeding grounds in April through early May.	marbled_godwit				
262	57	Limosa	haemastica	Hudsonian Godwit		LC		Casual fall migrant. Most records are juveniles from the Pacific Coast, Semiahmoo Bay (Whatcom County), and Columbia Basin, late August to mid-October. Accidental in spring.		1								hudsonian_godwit				
263	57	Limosa	lapponica	Bar-tailed Godwit	occasional spring/fall migrant	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the worldwide Bar-tailed Godwit population at 1,345,000 birds, with 100,000 of those nesting in North America.  Reports of this rare visitor have been increasing in Washington, but it is not known if this is a true increase, or a reflection of increased observation.  (The number of wintering Marbled Godwits also seems to be increasing.)	A rare migrant in Washington, the Bar-tailed Godwit is distinctive in its breeding plumage.  It has an unstreaked, rufous breast, dark legs, and mottled brown back. The head is lighter rufous and black, and the bill is long with a slight up-curve.  In winter plumage, the Bar-tailed Godwit is mottled gray-brown overall. Juveniles and adults in non-breeding plumage can be difficult to distinguish from the more common Marbled Godwit. The Bar-tailed has relatively shorter legs and longer wings than the Marbled, and a very pale whitish lower breast and belly. When the Bar-tailed is standing, the wing-tips extend beyond the tail. The female's bill is longer than the male's.  Rarely seen spring birds are typically in breeding plumage, while fall birds are usually in non-breeding plumage. Many are juveniles, especially during the latter part of the migration period.		1	Bar-tailed Godwits nest in rolling tundra with hummocks and low shrubs.  During migration and winter, they are found in tidal mudflats along the coast.	A rare visitor, the Bar-tailed Godwit is usually found during migration on the outer coast at places such as Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) and Tokeland (Pacific County), or sometimes at Blaine, (Whatcom County), or in the Strait of Juan de Fuca at Dungeness Spit (Clallam County).  One was sighted on the mudflats at the Lincoln Street wetlands in Tacoma (Pierce County).  The first record was in 1931, and the second wasn't until 1972. Sightings now average about two a year in the Pacific Northwest.  Bar-tailed Godwits are more likely to be seen in the fall, and are reported three times as often in this season as in spring.  Fall records have ranged from August through October, and spring records from late April through mid-June.  A Bar-tailed Godwit wintered at Tokeland in 2001-2002.	Range-wide, Bar-tailed Godwits are typically found in large flocks during migration and winter.  In Washington, they are usually seen singly or in flocks with Marbled Godwits.  They forage by walking slowly and probing deep in the mud with their long, sensitive bills.  The female has a longer bill and can forage in deeper water than the male.	On the breeding grounds, insects are the main diet, supplemented at times with seeds and berries.  In coastal areas, Bar-tailed Godwits eat crustaceans, mollusks, worms, and other aquatic invertebrates.		Bar-tailed Godwits first breed at the age of two.  Males defend territories and attract mates with an aerial display high over their nesting habitat in the tundra.  The nest is located on the ground, often on a raised hummock. The nest itself is a shallow scrape lined with grass, moss, and lichen.  Both parents help incubate the four eggs for about 21 days.  The young leave the nest soon after hatching, and the parents lead them to a marshy area where they find their own food. Both parents tend and protect the young, which fledge at about 30 days.	Bar-tailed Godwits nest across Europe and Asia, and a population has crossed the Bering Strait and nests in Alaska.  They are long-distance migrants, wintering from Southeast Asia south to Australia and New Zealand.  During migration some birds may wander to the coasts of North America.	bar-tailed_godwit				
264	6	Lophodytes	cucullatus	Hooded Merganser	Common resident west. Uncommon east.	LC	Habitat destruction and the loss of nesting cavities have undoubtedly resulted in a decline, although in recent decades numbers have stabilized and appear to be on the increase in many areas with the help of nest boxes and wetland-restoration efforts. Hooded Mergansers have a relatively small population and low productivity rates due to their delayed onset of breeding (not breeding until age two). They are also slow to colonize new breeding areas, making it more important to conserve the areas where this duck is currently breeding.	This duck is the smallest merganser commonly found in Washington. Hooded Mergansers have a crest that, like a fan, can be spread or closed. Like other mergansers, it has a narrow, serrate bill. The male in breeding plumage is distinctive, with olive-brown sides and a black back accented with white stripes down the middle of a few long feathers. His breast is white with two black bars on each side. The black border surrounding the white crest extends to the face, which is punctuated with a yellow eye.  Females are brown-gray overall, lighter below and darker on the back. The crest of the female is reddish-brown. The juvenile looks like the female, as does the male in non-breeding plumage, although his crest is browner.		1	Small, forested, freshwater wetlands with emergent vegetation are the preferred breeding habitat of the Hooded Merganser. They have been known to breed in more open habitat when nest boxes are available. Low-elevation freshwater lakes, ponds, sloughs, and slow-moving rivers are all used. During migration, they visit a wider range of habitats, and are often found on open water, along river banks, and in coastal bays and tidal creeks. In winter, they are found in woodland ponds and swamps, as well as coastal estuaries, bays, and inlets. While they are found in brackish and salt water, they generally prefer fresh water.	In the summer, Hooded Mergansers are generally found in wooded lowland areas throughout Washington. They are absent from the flat and sandy southwestern coast of the state, mountains above 3,000 feet, and the Columbia Basin. They are fairly common breeders in suitable habitat in western Washington. In eastern Washington, they are more sporadically distributed along the northern river valleys, particularly along the Okanogan River (Okanogan County), Curlew Creek (Ferry County), Colville River (Stevens County), and Pend Oreille River (Pend Oreille County). In winter, they are common in appropriate habitat in western Washington, along the coast, and in the wetlands of the Columbia Basin.	The dramatic courtship displays of the Hooded Merganser are apparent on the wintering grounds where groups gather in small flocks and most pair formation begins. During these displays, the male fans his crest.	Hooded Mergansers have a more diverse diet than that of other mergansers. Small fish, crustaceans--especially crayfish, and aquatic insects are all common prey items. Insects are especially important for the young. Hooded Mergansers have underwater vision, which helps them forage while diving.	Generally found below 3,000 feet elevation (Smith et al. 1997). Fairly common in freshwater ponds, sloughs, and slow-moving rivers west of Cascade crest, with highest breeding density in Kitsap and lowland King Counties. Kittitas County records concentrated in Yakima River corridor near Cle Elum, with none in eastern county. Prefers shallow water with emergent vegetation. Nests in tree cavities and readily utilizes nest boxes.	Yearling females often prospect for potential nest sites for the following year, and generally start breeding at the age of two. Pair bonds last from winter until incubation begins. It is uncertain whether bonds reform the following year, or if all pairing begins anew. Hooded Mergansers nest in cavities 10 to 50 feet up a tree or in nest boxes. The nest is made from materials found in the cavity and lined with down. The female lays 10 to 12 eggs, and commonly lays eggs in the nests of other Hooded Mergansers and those of other cavity-nesting ducks. Incubation is by the female alone and lasts for 26 to 41 days, averaging 33 days. When incubation starts, the male leaves the nesting area. Within 24 hours of hatching, the young jump to the ground and head to the water. Here they can swim well and find their own food. The female tends them and leads them to food-rich areas for a few weeks, but abandons them before they can fly, at around 70 days.	Hooded Mergansers migrate short distances. They have usually left coastal wintering areas by April and return in mid-November.	hooded_merganser	HOME			
265	24	Loxia	curvirostra	Red Crossbill	Fairly common but irregular resident.	LC	Because Red Crossbills are nomadic in nature, the number of birds in any one place varies greatly from year to year, and it is hard to determine population status. Crossbills depend on mature trees for food, and logging practices that do not allow trees to reach cone-bearing age can be detrimental to the population.  The species has a high reproductive potential, however, and can recover quickly from losses.  At this time, they are currently widespread and common, but their requirement for mature trees is most likely the most significant threat they face.	Red Crossbills are finches with highly specialized, crossed bills and long, pointed wings.  Male Red Crossbills are brick-red with black wings and no white wing-bars.  Females are greenish-yellow with black wings and no wing-bars.  Juveniles are streaked brown.  The bill size of Red Crossbills varies considerably and correlates with distinct habitat and food preferences as well as flight calls.  These characteristics can be used to split Red Crossbills into eight distinct types, and it is likely that the species will be divided into multiple species in the future.		1	Red Crossbills typically inhabit mature conifer forests, and the different types tend to specialize on preferred trees, including western hemlock, Ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine, Sitka, and Engleman spruce.	Because of their nomadic behavior, it is difficult to specify locations where Red Crossbills may be found. They can be abundant in Washington when there are good cone crops, and thousands of birds sometimes wander into the lowlands and coast from late summer through winter. However, their presence throughout Washington varies annually.  Of the eight distinct types, six can be found in Washington.  One form with a large and heavy bill breeds in Ponderosa, lodgepole, and shore pines throughout Washington.  A small form with a small bill inhabits Sitka spruce and western hemlock on the Olympic Peninsula.  A second type also specializes on western hemlock and can be found on the Olympic Peninsula.  The third common form specializes on Douglas fir throughout the state.  Two more types specialize in high-elevation lodgepole pine and Engleman spruce in the Cascades, Okanogan Highlands, and Blue Mountains.	Red Crossbills are usually found in small flocks year round.  They typically climb in mature conifers, using their bills to grab branches and cones.  They will also occasionally land on deciduous trees and forage for aphids.  Their bills are adapted for removing seeds from cones, and they start at the bottom of a cone and spiral upward, prying open each scale and removing the seeds with their tongues.  The bills can cross in either direction, and the direction of the cross dictates the direction that the bird spirals up the cone.  Each type has a distinct flight call, which is helpful in identification and may play a role in maintaining the isolation of each group.	Conifer seeds make up the main diet of Red Crossbills.  They also eat the buds of some trees, weed seeds, berries, and some insects, especially aphids.	Fairly common and widespread throughout all coniferous forests. Feeds principally on seeds from cones of coniferous trees. Distribution varies dependent on food availability, with birds absent from wide areas of appropriate habitat in years of poor mast production. Several types of Red Crossbill&#8212;identifiable by call notes and feeding preferences for cones of different tree species&#8212;may eventually be recognized as separate species. At least four of these probably occur within our four-county area, but more study needed. Low level of breeding confirmation indicates that many records may represent transients in search of food sources.	The breeding cycle of Red Crossbills is more closely tied to food availability than it is to season.  They can breed at almost any time of year, and will do so even in mid-winter if there is an abundant source of seeds.  They are monogamous, and pairs form within flocks.  The female builds the nest, which is located on a horizontal branch high up in a conifer tree.  The nest is a bulky cup of loose twigs, grass, and bark strips, lined with fine grass, lichen, feathers, and hair.  The female typically incubates 3 eggs for 12 to 16 days.  The male brings food to the incubating female and to the young for the first few days after they hatch.  After five days of continuous brooding, the female joins the male in bringing food to the young.  The young leave the nest after 18 to 22 days.  The parents continue to feed the young for about a month after they hatch.  The bills of young birds are not crossed at hatching, but cross as they grow.  By 45 days they are crossed enough for the young to extract seeds from cones.	Red Crossbills are nomadic and congregate in areas with high levels of cone production.  They often move into wooded lowlands in winter, but there is no consistent migration.	red_crossbill	RECR			
266	24	Loxia	leucoptera	White-winged Crossbill	Irregular resident.	LC	Numbers in Washington are quite variable.  White-winged Crossbills appear to come into the state when cone crops are low in other areas. They generally stay for a few years and move on when they have exhausted their supply of Engleman spruce cones.  They have a high reproductive potential, however, and can recover quickly from losses when they find a new food supply.  Forestry practices pose significant threats to the population.  Most conifers do not produce suitable cone crops until they are 30 years old, and don't maximize cone production until they are 60 years old.  Logging rotations need to be long enough to allow cone production in order to sustain White-winged Crossbills.  Construction and maintenance of roads in forested areas also reduce habitat for these birds.	White-winged Crossbills are finches with highly specialized, crossed bills and long, pointed wings.  Male White-winged Crossbills are rosy-red with black wings and two white wing-bars.  Females are dark greenish-yellow with black wings and white wing-bars.  Juveniles are streaked brown, also with wing-bars.		1	White-winged Crossbills are a far northern species, typically found in boreal forests with mature Engleman spruce and larch.  They may also use western and mountain hemlock.	White-winged Crossbills are typical of areas farther north, and are rare in Washington.  In many years, none are seen, while in other years there are large invasions, especially in the north Cascades and northeastern Washington in winter.  They have probably bred in northeastern Washington and the north Cascades, perhaps even as far south as Mount Rainier.	White-winged Crossbills can be found in large flocks year round and call when they are foraging in an unproductive area.  When many seeds are available they remain quiet.  If only a few birds call, the flock continues to forage, but if a number of birds call, the flock will move on to find a more productive spot. Their bills are adapted for removing seeds from cones, and they start at the bottom of a cone and spiral upward, prying open each scale and removing the seeds with their tongues.  The bills can cross in either direction, and the direction of the cross dictates the direction that the bird spirals up the cone.  They can eat up to 3,000 seeds a day.	In Washington, White-winged Crossbills eat almost entirely Engleman spruce seeds.	Recorded by BBA observers at possible and probable (once) levels in Wenatchee Mountains and along Cascade crest, although breeding not confirmed anywhere in Washington to date. Absent or nearly so in our four-county area most years; records indicate presence during irruption years. White-winged Crossbills prefer fairly mature spruce and larch forests, which limits their distribution to high boreal forest zones. May breed at any time of year, depending on cone crop availability.	The breeding cycle of White-winged Crossbills is more closely tied to food availability than it is to season.  They can breed at any time of year, often in mid-winter if there is an abundant source of seeds.  They may be able to breed as young as five months old, and can have multiple clutches in a year.  This results in a high reproductive potential.  They are monogamous, and pairs form within flocks.  The female builds the nest, which is typically on a horizontal branch high up in a spruce tree.  The nest is an open cup of twigs, weeds, grass, and bark strips, lined with rootlets, lichen, moss, and hair.  The female incubates 2 to 4 eggs for about 12 to 14 days.  The male brings food to the incubating female and to the young for the first few days after they hatch.  After about five days of continuous brooding, the female joins the male in bringing food to the young.  The young leave the nest after about 18 to 22 days.  Once the young fledge, the male may continue to care for them while the female begins a second clutch.  The young birds' mandibles begin to cross about two weeks after they fledge, and they learn to extract seeds soon after that.	White-winged Crossbills do not undertake a regular migration, but do wander nomadically throughout their range and congregate in areas with large cone crops.  Many of these movements occur in late October and November.  Birds in the Pacific Northwest may travel as far as the northeastern United States in search of food, and birds from farther north may come into Washington in the winter when northern cone crops fail.	white-winged_crossbill				
267	57	Lymnocryptes	minimus	Jack Snipe		LC		One record, from Skagit Game Range (Skagit County) in September.		1								jack_snipe				
268	4	Megaceryle	alcyon	Belted Kingfisher	Fairly common resident.	LC	According to breeding bird surveys, the population in Washington has remained stable over the last 35 years.  Kingfishers appear to be less susceptible to environmental contaminants than other fish-eating birds, possibly because their diet is restricted to smaller fish.  Availability of suitable banks for nesting is a limiting factor in distribution and abundance.  Water quality and nesting sites must be protected for successful reproduction.	The Belted Kingfisher is a medium-sized, stocky bird with a large, crested head, and a long, solid bill.  The bird has a small white spot by each eye, at the base of the bill.  Its back is an overall slate blue color.  The white belly is transected by a slate blue band, topped with a white collar.  The female has an additional rufous band and rufous coloring on the sides of the belly.		1	Belted Kingfishers are found along shorelines and wetlands in fresh and salt water environments.  They require sandy vertical banks for nest burrows and clear water so they can see their aquatic prey.	Kingfishers are common year round (as long as there is open water) in wetlands and along rivers and streams at elevations below the sub-alpine fir and mountain hemlock zones throughout Washington, and along the coasts.	Belted Kingfishers perch or hover over open water, watching for prey.  Once prey is sighted, they dive headfirst into the water and seize it with their bills.  Typically prey is taken near the surface, and the birds do not submerge themselves completely.  Belted Kingfishers are highly territorial and vigorously defend their territories.  Their most common call is a dry rattle, often given in flight.	Belted Kingfishers almost always take food from the water, feeding predominantly on small fish. They will also prey on crayfish, frogs, tadpoles, and other aquatic dwellers.	Locally common in freshwater, estuarine, and coastal habitats throughout four-county area at low and moderate elevations. Requires suitable site for excavating nest burrow, preferably sandy banks&#8212;hence mostly absent from basalt-rimmed canyons of eastern Kittitas County. Infrequent at high-elevation lakes due to low prey availability.	The Belted Kingfisher nests in burrows dug in sandy banks.  Two of its toes are fused together and act as a shovel for digging these burrows.  Both the male and the female incubate the 6-7 eggs that she lays in the burrow.  Both parents regurgitate fish to feed the young.	Across their range, some kingfishers migrate as far south as northern South America.  In parts of Washington where water remains open through the winter, kingfishers can be found year round; others in the state are migratory.  They leave interior and higher elevation breeding grounds by September.	belted_kingfisher	BEKI			
269	60	Megascops	kennicottii	Western Screech-Owl	Uncommon to fairly common resident.	LC	Western Screech-Owls are difficult to survey because of their secretive nature.  A limiting factor in their numbers is the available of suitable nest cavities.  Urban development is a threat to habitat, although these owls will breed in the suburbs.  The Washington Breeding Bird Survey has recorded a decline in numbers in recent years throughout the species' range, and declines have also been observed in southern British Columbia.  There is speculation that predation from the expanding population of Barred Owls, recent arrivals in some areas, is a factor.  Across America, Christmas Bird Counts have shown an increase in numbers, but this may be due to increased observer effort rather than an actual increase in population.	Western Screech-Owls are small owls with yellow eyes, dark bills, and ear-tufts that are often but not always raised.  They have intricately streaked gray or gray-brown plumage, with owls of the eastern Washington subspecies lighter in color than those of the western.  Flammulated Owls are smaller but similar in coloration; they can best be distinguished from Western Screech-Owls by their dark eyes.	Not truly a screech, but a series of short, low pitched whistles that speed up towards the end. Has been described as a bouncy double trill.	1	Western Screech-Owls are common in open woodlands, forested streamsides, deserts, suburban areas, and parks.  They tend to avoid dense forests without openings.  Although they occur in a wide variety of habitats, they are most often found in deciduous or mixed forest microhabitats, often along streams.  They commonly nest in cottonwood or big-leaf maple.	Western Screech-Owls are fairly common at low to moderate elevations both east and west of the Cascades.  They are absent from most of the central Columbia basin.  They can be difficult to observe but will respond to playback tapes.  They can be found in Lincoln and Schmitz Parks in West Seattle (King County), at Chuckanut Mountain (Whatcom County), at Rainbow Falls State Park (Lewis County), at Wenas Creek (Yakima County), and at Fish Hook Park (Walla Walla County).	Western Screech-Owls are nocturnal, although the owls of the western Washington subspecies are sometimes active on cloudy days.  Western Screech-Owls are aggressive for their size and can take even large prey such as grouse when feeding young.  When threatened, Western Screech-Owls will often stand erect, slick their body feathers down, hold their ear-tufts up, and draw the feathers around their beaks forward.  This posture allows the cryptically colored owl to blend in with the tree branch that it is perched on.	Western Screech-Owls feed on arthropods, reptiles, amphibians, small mammals, and occasionally birds.	Fairly common in low-elevation mixed woodlands throughout King County and on Bainbridge Island; no BBA records from Island County. Uncommon at low and moderate elevation in Kittitas County. Barely penetrates to higher elevations along riparian corridors on both sides of Cascade crest. Prefers forested habitats but also utilizes parks and residential areas with suitable vegetation within urbanized settings. May be declining, perhaps commensurate with Barred Owl increases. True distribution obscured by relative inadequacy of nocturnal survey efforts.	Monogamous pairs form long-term bonds.  Western Screech-Owls are secondary cavity nesters, making use of natural cavities, old Pileated Woodpecker or Northern Flicker holes, and nest boxes.  They nest at heights from 5 to 30 feet from the ground.  They do not add material to the nest.  Pairs typically hatch one brood per year.  The female incubates 3-5 eggs for 33-34 days while the male brings her food.  Once the young hatch, the female broods for about three weeks while the male brings food to her and the owlets.  The young leave the cavity and venture onto nearby branches 7-10 days later.    They stay close to the nest for a few nights while they develop their ability to fly, and they continue to remain near the adults for about five weeks after their first flights.	Western Screech-Owls do not migrate, and pairs are resident on their territories year round.	western_screech-owl				
270	47	Melanerpes	formicivorus	Acorn Woodpecker	Rare, very local east.	LC	Abundant throughout their range, Acorn Woodpecker populations are limited by the availability of acorns and granary sites.  Their populations tend to be highly fragmented, and their most significant current threat is habitat degradation.  There are few data on population trends in Washington State.	The Acorn Woodpecker has a black back and chest, white belly with black lateral stripes, white rump, and white wing-patches. Its head is patterned in a striking and distinctive 'clown pattern,' with a white forehead, yellowish to white throat, black about the bill, a stripe of black surrounding the eyes and running down to join the black of the nape and back, and white irises that make its eyes especially prominent. The crown of the male is red, that of the female black and red.		1	Acorn Woodpeckers' habitat is oak country or country where oaks are interspersed with other types of trees. They are most common where several species of oak occur together.	Washington is at the extreme northern edge of the breeding range of the Acorn Woodpecker. They are currently found only in Klickitat County, and are local and irruptive along the Klickitat River in Lyle.  They bred there in 1990, but were last seen at this site in early 1992.  Acorn Woodpeckers probably breed near Balch Lake, where they have been present since 1990.  They have been seen at Fort Simcoe in Yakima County, but not since 1979.	Acorn Woodpeckers have a complicated social structure.  They live in family groups of up to a dozen or more individuals and drill small holes in dead snags, utility poles, or sides of buildings.  In the fall, they store acorns or other nuts in these holes to provide food for the winter.  They work on these 'granaries' over the years, and trees may have up to 50,000 holes!  All members of the group defend their granaries, which would be valuable food sources for many animals. Groups typically have a primary granary and one or more secondary ones.	About half of the Acorn Woodpecker's diet is acorns, which are especially important in winter.  They also eat sap from sapsucker holes or from holes they themselves have drilled and also some fruit, flower nectar, seeds, and insects, especially flying ants.		Each group of Acorn Woodpeckers has 1 to 7 breeding males and 1 to 3 breeding females.  The rest of the group do not breed but help raise the young.  All eggs are laid in a single nest, which is excavated by both breeders and helpers.  Each female lays about 5 eggs, but clutches with more than one laying female can have up to 17 eggs.  If there are several breeding females, a bird may destroy another bird's eggs before beginning to lay eggs herself, but once all females are laying, they do not disturb the communal clutch.  At first, only breeding females incubate the eggs, but later other group members also incubate.  Incubation lasts about 11 days.  All group members help brood and feed the young.  The young leave the nest after 30 to 32 days, although fledglings return to the nest to roost and feed.  Acorn Woodpeckers typically raise one or two broods each year.	Acorn Woodpeckers generally do not migrate since they have a site-specific food storage system that they enlarge and defend year after year. However populations may wander if local acorn crops fail.	acorn_woodpecker				
271	47	Melanerpes	lewis	Lewis's Woodpecker	Fairly common resident east. Casual west.	LC	The population of Lewis's Woodpeckers has been reduced by the arrival of European Starlings, which compete for nest sites. They were formerly fairly common in western Washington in burns and prairies, but with development and fire suppression, along with the invasion of starlings, they have been extirpated as a breeding species from western Washington. As Lewis's Woodpeckers are local and erratic in occurrence, their population is difficult to monitor. A decline seen in Washington and throughout their range over the years has led to their listing as an at-risk species by Partners in Flight, Audubon~Washington, and the Washington Gap Analysis project.  They are also candidates for endangered-species listing by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.	Lewis's Woodpeckers are large, unusual-looking woodpeckers with dark iridescent green-black backs, pink undersides, gray breasts and collars, and red faces rimmed with black.  Males and female look alike. Juveniles also have dark iridescent green-black backs, but are mottled brown beneath, with dark brown heads and no gray collars or red faces.		1	Lewis's Woodpeckers prefer open forests with brushy understories and snags for nesting.  In Washington, they use three main types of habitat: forested riversides with large cottonwoods and other hardwoods, Ponderosa pine forests, especially at the lower edge of the tree line, and Garry oak stands.	Lewis's Woodpeckers breed in eastern Washington, where they are locally common at the transition zone between Ponderosa pine and shrub-steppe habitats.  They are also uncommon breeders in northeastern Washington in Pend Oreille, Stevens, and Lincoln Counties.  They were formerly common in far-eastern Washington, but numbers in Spokane County have declined dramatically, and populations appear to be extirpated in Walla Walla and Columbia Counties, although there may still be a lingering breeding colony in the Blue Mountains.  They can sometimes be found as rare migrants in western Washington. Winter populations can also often be found at Fort Simco and Upper Cowiche Creek (Yakima County), and Klickitat County.	In spring and summer when flying insects are about, Lewis's Woodpeckers get most of their food by fly-catching, sometimes flying quite high.  In the fall, they chop nuts into pieces and store them in crevices and holes in trees for the winter. They guard these storage areas throughout the cold season. Lewis's Woodpeckers have a more steady, buoyant flight than most other woodpeckers, with slower wing-beats and longer glides.  In flight they can often be mistaken for crows.	Flying insects make up most of the Lewis's Woodpecker's spring and summer diet.  In fall and winter they feed principally on acorns, other nuts, seeds, and fruits.	Not recorded in Island, Kitsap, and King Counties, although historically present in western Washington's forest burns and prairie landscapes (Jewett et al. 1953). Fairly common in open forests and woody riparian corridors in Kittitas County in ponderosa pine zone and its shrub-steppe interface. Still widespread in these habitats, although local and thought to be declining. Records extend east and south well beyond predicted distribution mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	Lewis's Woodpeckers are monogamous and may form long-term pair bonds.  Both members of the pair excavate a hole in a decayed tree, typically a cottonwood or Ponderosa pine. The nest consists of a wood-chip lining inside the hole.  They commonly reuse nest sites.  Both members of the pair generally incubate the 6 to 7 eggs for 12 to 16 days.  Both feed the young, which leave the nest after 28 to 34 days.  The young are dependent on the parents for some time after they leave the nest.	Most Lewis's Woodpeckers leave Washington in the winter for points south, typically southern Oregon or California. Their migratory movements can vary considerably from year to year, especially if acorn crops fail, but a number of birds often winter in south-central Washington.	lewiss_woodpecker				
272	6	Melanitta	fusca	White-winged Scoter	Common winter on coast. Uncommon inland and coast summer.	VU	White-winged Scoters were formerly more numerous, breeding in prairie habitats where they no longer breed. Changes in land use associated with agriculture in these regions have left the scoters without cover for nesting. There are other challenges, too. Of all seabirds, scoters are among the most vulnerable to oil spills. Blue mussels, one of their staple prey species, are known to concentrate toxic chemicals, potentially passing this toxicity on to White-winged Scoters. The scoters' strong fidelity to breeding sites, low productivity, and slow maturation make them slow to rebound from losses and make those losses of greater concern.	Scoters are large, mostly black or dark gray sea ducks, and the White-winged Scoter is the largest of the three species. All plumages have a white wing-patch, which distinguishes the White-winged Scoter in flight from the other two scoters, which have solid black wings. The White-winged Scoter can also be distinguished by its sloping forehead and bill, which is less bulbous than that of the others. The adult male is solid black with a white comma around a white eye. Its bill is yellow and has a dark knob at the base. The juvenile and the female have light gray patches in front of and behind their eyes, and are dark gray overall with gray bills.		1	White-winged Scoters nest on freshwater lakes and wetlands in open country in the northwest interior of North America. They winter in open, coastal environments, favoring bays and inlets with sandy shores and shellfish beds. White-winged Scoters are generally found in deeper water and farther from shore than the other scoters.	White-winged Scoters vary from uncommon to abundant along Washington's coastline and in Puget Sound from the late summer through spring (July through mid-June). Areas of abundance vary from year to year. White-winged Scoters are the most common scoter to be found on inland sites outside of the breeding season. Throughout Washington's lowlands, while still rare, White-winged Scoters may be seen on lakes and wetlands in late fall or early winter during migration. Flocks of non-breeders can also be seen in coastal areas in summer in some of the more heavily used winter locations such as Penn Cove off Whidbey Island and Drayton Harbor (Whatcom County).	White-winged Scoters spend the non-breeding part of the year in large flocks on the ocean. They feed almost exclusively by diving, taking prey from the ocean floor, and swallowing the small items under water. Scoters are strong flyers, but must get a running start along the water to get airborne.	During winter, mollusks and crustaceans are the most common food item. During the breeding season, aquatic insect larvae become a predominant part of the diet. Crustaceans and other aquatic invertebrates are also eaten.		White-winged Scoters probably form pair bonds during migration in their second or third year. Nests are built on the ground close to water, and hidden by brush. The nest is a shallow depression lined with down and occasionally additional plant material. The female typically lays 8 to 10 eggs and incubates them for 25 to 30 days. The pair bond dissolves, and the male leaves soon after incubation begins. Pair bonds do not appear to re-form between the same birds in succeeding years. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and feed themselves. The female tends the young and broods them at night for 1 to 3 weeks, after which she leaves them to fend for themselves. They fledge at 63 to 77 days.	White-winged Scoters are among the latest migrant ducks to reach the breeding grounds, and much is not known about their migratory patterns. Males appear to winter farther north than females, and molting sites are in unknown, remote locations.	white-winged_scoter	WWSC			
273	6	Melanitta	nigra	Black Scoter	Fairly common winter coast.	LC	Although the Black Scoter is by some accounts the least numerous of the scoters in North America, numbers appear to be stable. Other sources document a long-term trend of decline. Many surveys of scoters do not differentiate between the three species, and it is difficult to determine the population trends of each species independently. The two most significant potential threats to Black Scoters in Washington are oil spills and heavy-metal contamination (which accumulates in prey items such as mussels).	Black Scoters are large, mostly black or dark gray sea ducks. Formerly called the Common Scoter, the Black Scoter is the least common of the three scoters. Adult males are solid black with a bulbous yellow knob on an otherwise black bill. Females and juveniles are dark gray, lighter on the cheek with a dark cap. Their bills are dark and lack the knob found in adult males.		1	The breeding range of the Black Scoter is at the edge of the northern forest or in the treeless tundra, where they breed on small, shallow lakes, ponds, sloughs, and river banks with tall grasses to conceal nests.  In winter, they can be found on coastal bays and along coastlines, usually in shallow water within a mile of shore.	Some of the major wintering areas of Black Scoters in the West include the coastal waters off Washington, where they are widespread but not common from mid-November to mid-May. Limited numbers can also be found in the Strait of Juan de Fuca and Puget Sound. They are regularly seen at Budd Inlet in the Olympia Harbor (Thurston County) and in Penn Cove on Whidbey Island (Island County).	Scoters spend the non-breeding part of the year in large flocks on the ocean. Black Scoters forage by diving and swimming under water, propelled by their feet. They usually feed in areas of open water, avoiding dense submergent or emergent vegetation. They swallow their prey under water, unless it is large or bulky. They are strong fliers, but must get a running start on the water to get airborne.	At sea, mollusks are the most common prey item of the Black Scoter, although crustaceans and other aquatic invertebrates are also part of the diet. On fresh water, aquatic insects, fish eggs, mollusks, small fish, and some plant matter are eaten.		Most females probably start breeding at the age of two. Pairs form in late fall and winter. The female builds the nest on the ground, usually near the water on a hummock or ridge, well concealed by vegetation. The nest is a shallow depression lined with plant material and down. The female lays 8 to 9 eggs and incubates them for 27 to 31 days. The pair bond dissolves, and the male departs for the molting grounds soon after the female begins incubation. It is not known whether pairs re-form in the fall, or if new pairs are formed. Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest and head to the water. The female tends the young and continues to brood them at night, but they can swim and feed themselves. Most females abandon their broods after one to three weeks. Multiple broods gather together on lakes until they can fly, at 6 to 7 weeks.	Black Scoters migrate north from March through May and south from late September through November. The fall migration is preceded by a molt migration where birds molt in large groups at northern coastal sites before heading south in fresh plumage.	black_scoter	BLSC			
274	6	Melanitta	perspicillata	Surf Scoter	Common winter on coast. Uncommon inland and coast summer.	LC	Continent-wide, Surf Scoters may have gone through a serious decline early in the 20th Century, but now appear to be numerous with a stable population. There is evidence of a long-term decline in the West, and large die-offs were observed in the early 1990s at coastal reefs in southeastern Alaska. The cause of these die-offs is unknown, but pesticides or other contaminants are the suspected cause. The population is vulnerable to oil spills on the wintering grounds and disturbance and habitat destruction as a result of oil drilling on breeding grounds.	Scoters are large, mostly black or dark gray sea ducks. The male Surf Scoter has a solid black body and black head with white patches at the back of the head and on the forehead above the eyes. This distinctive pattern has earned this bird the nickname 'skunk-head coot.' The bill of the adult male is large, swollen at the base, and yellow-orange with a white and yellow splotch on each side and a black spot on the splotch. The female is mostly dark gray. Her bill is shaped like that of the male, although slightly smaller and mostly gray in color. The female has white patches at the base of her bill and white smudging at her ears and back of her head. Both sexes have white eyes. Juveniles are similar to females but have black eyes.		1	Surf Scoters nest on freshwater lakes and wetlands in the Arctic, in sparsely forested and semi-open regions. They winter in open coastal environments, favoring shallow bays and estuaries with rocky substrates.	The most common scoter in the region, Surf Scoters are seen in large flocks from July through mid-May along the entire coast of Washington, in large estuaries, and in Puget Sound. During migration, Surf Scoters are found rarely in freshwater lakes inland and on the Columbia River. Flocks of non-breeders can also be seen in coastal areas in the summer in some of the more heavily used winter locations such as Penn Cove off Whidbey Island and Drayton Harbor in Whatcom County.	Scoters spend the non-breeding part of the year in large rafts on the ocean or in open bays and inlets. They forage almost exclusively by diving, taking prey from the ocean floor and also taking mussels from man-made structures. They are strong flyers but must get a running start along the water to get airborne. Males actively defend their mates, keeping other birds at bay.	During winter, mollusks and crustaceans are the most common food items. During the breeding season, aquatic insect larvae become a predominant part of the diet. Surf Scoters also eat other aquatic invertebrates and pondweeds.		Surf Scoters probably form pair bonds on the wintering grounds in their second or third year. Nests are built on the ground, hidden by dense brush or low tree branches. They are usually located close to water, but can be some distance away. The nest is a well-concealed, shallow depression on the ground, lined with vegetation and down. The female typically lays 5 to 9 eggs (usually 7) and incubates them for about 28 to 30 days, although the incubation period is not well known. The pair bond dissolves, and the male leaves soon after incubation begins. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and can feed themselves, although the female tends them and leads them to food-rich areas. In dense breeding areas, mixing of broods may occur. The female abandons the chicks before they can fly (at about 55 days), and multiple broods often join to form crèches.	Complete, medium-distance migrants, most Surf Scoters arrive on wintering grounds in Washington in October and November. In the spring, they leave in March and April, often gathering off Saltspring Island in British Columbia to take advantage of the large Pacific herring smolt before heading to breeding areas. The post-breeding molt migration is well developed in Surf Scoters. After the females begin incubation, the males gather along the coast of British Columbia and Alaska, and in the Bering and Beaufort Seas before they head to their wintering areas. Females and the young of the year may join the males at these molting sites or may take other migration routes.	surf_scoter	SUSC			
275	46	Meleagris	gallopavo	Wild Turkey	Uncommon resident, mostly east.	LC	Wild Turkeys were introduced in Washington from the eastern United States by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Since the 1960s, they have been released on state wildlife areas and have spread out into neighboring areas where suitable. The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife continues to trap and relocate Wild Turkeys within the state to expand the population.	One of the largest birds found in North America, the Wild Turkey is the only bird from the Western Hemisphere to gain worldwide importance through domestication. Its large body is a dark brownish-gray with iridescent black and green barring. Its small, unfeathered head and thin neck appear disproportional to its large body. The flesh on the male's head is blue and red.		1	Three subspecies of Wild Turkey have been introduced in different areas of Washington. All three use slightly different habitats, but all depend on a combination of trees and grasslands for survival. Forest patches with oak and Ponderosa pine produce food and cover for adults. Nearby grasslands provide an open area where the young can forage for insects. In this arrangement, the young stay hidden while the adults watch for predators.	The distribution of Wild Turkeys throughout Washington is spotty due to introductions. The Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife can provide more detailed information about release sites. The Rio Grande subspecies can be found in Asotin, Columbia, Garfield, Kittitas, Lincoln, Okanogan, Walla Walla, and Whitman Counties. The eastern subspecies has been released west of the Cascades in Cowlitz, Grays Harbor, Lewis, Mason, Pacific, Thurston, and Wahkiakum Counties. The Merriam's subspecies can be found in Ferry, Klickitat, Pend Oreille, Skamania, and Stevens Counties, and is well established and numerous in the northeast corner of the state (Ferry, Pend Oreille, and Stevens Counties).	Wild Turkeys are most commonly found in flocks and are often seen walking across open fields. They typically get around by walking although they can fly and often roost overnight in tall trees. During his courtship display, the male puffs up his body and fans his tail.	A large proportion of the Wild Turkey's diet consists of corns, seeds, leaves, grains, and berries. Insects and other invertebrates make up the remainder of their diet. Young birds primarily eat insects for the first few weeks of life, and then shift to a diet similar to that of the adults.	Native to eastern United States. Regularly released in various parts of Washington, principally by Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Usually found in fields, brushy areas, open forests, and stream corridors. Breeding confirmed twice in Kittitas County toward end of BBA periodâ??near Taneum Point on South Cle Elum Ridge (1999) and in Swauk Creek basin north of Liberty (2000).	In the spring, the male attracts females by gobbling, puffing his feathers, spreading his tail, swelling his face wattles, and drooping his wings. Using this display, one male attracts several females. The female builds a shallow nest at the base of a tree or other dense vegetation, lining it with a small amount of grass or leaves. She lays 10-15 eggs and incubates them on her own. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and feed themselves, although the female still tends them and broods them at night.	Wild Turkeys are not migratory. During the fall, however, they may wander to areas with larger trees and a more closed canopy for increased warmth and more abundant winter food.	wild_turkey				
276	42	Melospiza	georgiana	Swamp Sparrow	Rare winter resident, mostly west.	LC	Destruction of wetlands has resulted in a large loss of habitat for the Swamp Sparrow, but it is still fairly widespread and common across its normal breeding range.  Their nests are prone to damage from flooding, often due to nearby development or wetland destruction.  Preservation of expansive wetland areas is important to maintain a healthy population of Swamp Sparrows.  Until the late 1960s, they were rarely reported in the Northwest.  Now they are recorded annually in winter.	The Swamp Sparrow with its reddish cap might be confused with the Chipping Sparrow, but the Swamp Sparrow is bigger, bulkier, and occurs in very different habitat.  It is a reddish-brown bird with dark stripes down its back.  The neck and much of the face are gray, as is the breast.  The throat is white and, like the breast, lacks streaks.		1	Swamp Sparrows are seldom found far from water during the breeding season.  They usually breed in marshes and brushy swamps with some open water, dense, low vegetation, and perches for singing.  They winter in similar habitat, in grassy, weedy, and brushy areas close to water.  During migration, they may be seen in wet, weedy fields.	Rarely seen from mid-October through March, Swamp Sparrows are reported most often in western Washington at Spencer Island and at the Crescent Lake Wildlife area near Monroe (both in Snohomish County), and the Skagit Wildlife Area (Skagit County).  There are some migration and winter records in southeastern Washington and a few other places east of the Cascades.	Swamp Sparrows are generally solitary birds except during migration, when they often join loose, mixed-species flocks.  They often hide in dense cover and forage mostly on the ground, especially at or near the water's edge, sometimes wading into the water.  The vocalization is a slow trill, slower than the Chipping Sparrow, with the notes slow enough to count.	Swamp Sparrows eat both seeds and insects, relying more heavily on insects than do many sparrows.  In winter, they eat more seeds and fruits, but more than half of their diet is still composed of insects.  In spring and summer, the insect percentage of their diet rises to almost 90%, but then drops in the fall when the majority of their diet may be seeds.		The male defends his territory and attracts a mate by singing from a raised perch, often the top of a cattail.  The females arrive on the breeding grounds a few days after the males, and the birds form monogamous pair bonds.  Most nests are in marsh-vegetation over ground or water, within five feet of the ground.  The female builds a nest with a rough, bulky outer layer made of coarse marsh vegetation, and an inner lining of fine grass, sedge, and hair.  Dead cattail blades or other vegetation often arch over the top of the nest, forming a side entrance.  The female incubates the 3 to 5 eggs for 12 to 14 days, during which time the male may bring food to her on the nest.  Both parents help feed the nestlings, which leave the nest at 10 to 13 days.  For the first few days after fledging, the young make short flight-hops in the vegetation.  Within a week, they can fly from shrub to shrub.  The parents continue to feed the young for a few weeks after fledging. Pairs usually raise one or two broods a year.	Swamp Sparrows are generally migratory throughout their range. Wintering primarily in the eastern United States, a few winter and spring transients wander into Washington and other locations throughout the West.	swamp_sparrow				
277	42	Melospiza	lincolnii	Lincoln's Sparrow	Fairly common winter west, summer east.	LC	While they are common migrants throughout Washington, the breeding population is somewhat localized. Lincoln's Sparrows have fairly specialized breeding habitats, thus habitat preservation is quite important for this species. Wintering habitat also needs protection. Some eastern populations have experienced declines in recent years, but western populations of Lincoln's Sparrows appear to be stable or increasing.	The Lincoln's Sparrow is a small, streaky sparrow, similar in appearance to the Song Sparrow, but smaller and paler than the dark Song Sparrows seen in Washington. It has a white or buffy eye-ring and gray head. The breast is buffy and finely streaked, with the streaks often converging into a central spot, in sharp contrast with the belly, which is white and lacks streaks.		1	Breeding habitat is in wet, shrubby areas, usually above 3,000 feet. Lincoln's Sparrows are often found around the edges of ponds and marshes, open wet meadows, or other forest clearings with dense shrub cover. Low willow cover with dense ground vegetation is especially preferred. During migration, they can be found in dense, moist thickets, and in the winter, they inhabit grassy, weedy, and brushy areas, especially those with exotic reed canary grass, thistle, and blackberries, often near wetlands.	Lincoln's Sparrows are common breeders at high elevations in the northeastern corner of Washington. As migrants they are common throughout the state in appropriate habitat. Wintering birds are regular west of the Cascades, but are not typically found east of the mountains.	They do not join flocks of their own species, but one or two are often found flocking with other sparrows in winter and during migration. These secretive birds feed on the ground under cover in dense blackberry tangles and other brush.	In winter, Lincoln's Sparrows eat mostly small seeds and some invertebrates, occasionally visiting feeders. During the breeding season, they feed mostly on arthropods, especially insect larvae, and eat a small amount of seeds.	Fairly common and local, frequenting mid- and high-elevation bogs, swamps, and wet meadows mostly at and east of Cascade crest, with few if any BBA records below 3,000 feet. No records from high Cascades north of Snoqualmie Pass, no doubt reflecting paucity of preferred specialized habitat but also due in part to access difficulties for survey teams. Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) understates predicted range in eastern part of Wenatchee Mountains (Naneum Ridge) and also in Naches/Little Naches drainage and adjacent Manastash Ridge, near Kittitas/Yakima county boundary.	Males defend territories and attract mates by singing. The well-concealed nest is located on the ground, often in very boggy sites, inside a low willow or birch shrub, with dense sedge cover. It is usually sunken into a depression so that the rim is level with the ground. The female builds the nest, an open cup made of grass and sedge, lined with finer grasses and hair. The female incubates the 3 to 5 eggs for 10 to 13 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 10 to 11 days. The young are capable of sustained flight within a week of leaving the nest. The parents will continue to tend and feed the young for another 2 to 3 weeks.	All populations of Lincoln's Sparrows are migratory, although some summer and winter ranges overlap in New Mexico and Northern California. Migration is extended in both the fall and spring. Many Lincoln's Sparrows migrate through Washington, breeding in the far north and wintering in the south. There are also breeding populations in mountainous parts of the state, as well as wintering populations in western Washington. It is unknown whether the birds that winter in Washington also breed here, or if they come from points north.	lincolns_sparrow	LISP			
278	42	Melospiza	melodia	Song Sparrow	Common resident.	LC	Four subspecies of Song Sparrow are found in Washington, three of which breed in the state. One subspecies breeds from western Washington over the Cascades and into the Columbia Basin. A second breeds in eastern Washington, east of the Columbia River. A third subspecies breeds in south-central Washington. Breeders in far-eastern Washington are smaller and paler than the western breeders. In winter, a small, pale subspecies comes into western Washington from breeding grounds in interior British Columbia. Song Sparrows are widespread and abundant in North America and in Washington. Logging and suburban sprawl have increased the amount of shrubby habitat in many forests and suburban areas. Song Sparrows are one of Washington's most common birds, and the Breeding Bird Survey has indicated a small, not statistically significant increase in Washington from 1980 to 2002.	Washington's Song Sparrows are large, dark, heavily streaked, chunky birds. The face has dark streaks through each eye and on either side of the crown, with gray between the dark streaks. Both upperparts and underparts are also streaked. The streaks on the breast often converge into a central breast spot, but many other streak-breasted sparrows can also have a central spot like this, and thus this field mark is not diagnostic. The tail is long and often held cocked up, and is pumped up and down in flight.		1	Song Sparrows live in a variety of dense, brushy thickets. In eastern Washington, they are limited to shrubby habitats close to water.	Song Sparrows can be found in almost any shrubby habitat below 4,000 feet, with the exception of the arid shrub steppe in eastern Washington. They can easily be found breeding in cities, wetlands, clearcuts, and most farmed areas, although they are limited to urban areas and wetlands in the Columbia Basin. Above 4,000 feet, they are generally replaced by Fox and Lincoln's Sparrows, although there is some overlap. In winter, they can be found below the snow zone throughout the state where there is brushy cover, although they are more abundant west of the Cascades. Numbers east of the mountains vary from year to year.	Song Sparrows are solitary and highly territorial during the breeding season, but are found in loose flocks during migration and winter. They forage mostly on the ground, sometimes scratching the soil. They will come to bird feeders with adequate cover close by. These birds sing almost all year, and respond to 'pishing.'	Typical of the family, Song Sparrows eat insects and seeds, with a greater proportion of seeds in the fall and winter, and a greater proportion of insects in the spring and summer.	Common and widespread throughout counties west of Cascade crest, although less common at higher elevation. Fairly common but somewhat local in Kittitas County from crest to Columbia River, except mostly absent in subalpine parkland and non-irrigated shrub-steppe. Breeds abundantly in wetlands, clearcuts, and cultivated and urbanized settings, where often subject to cowbird parasitism, particularly on their second clutch. At least two races breed in our area, <i>M.m. morphna</i> on Westside and <i>M.m. merrilli</i> east of crest.	Song Sparrow nesting territories are often small, so nests may be close together resulting in high densities. Nest sites are highly variable, usually on the ground under a clump of grass, or in a shrub within four feet of the ground. In marshy areas, nests are often over water. The nest, built by the female, is an open cup of weeds, grass, leaves, and bark, lined with fine grass, rootlets, and hair. Nest materials vary greatly depending on materials available. The female incubates the 3 to 5 eggs for 12 to 14 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 10 to 12 days. Young birds stay near their parents for another three weeks until they learn to fly well and find their own food.	Song Sparrows are resident throughout much of their range, although the northernmost populations are migratory. Resident populations extend as far north as coastal Alaska. The wintering range stretches across the southern United States and dips into northern Mexico. Birds at high altitudes may also descend into the lowlands during the winter. Western Washington breeders are year-round residents, but some eastern Washington breeders migrate.  Interior British Columbia breeders also winter in western Washington.	song_sparrow	SOSP			
279	6	Mergellus	albellus	Smew		LC		The male Smew in breeding plumage is dazzling white with black markings on the head, back, and breast, a white crest lined with black, and pale-gray flanks and belly. Other plumages lack the crest and are mostly gray-and-black with white chin and throat and some chestnut on the head. This petite, small-billed diving duck is a close relative of the mergansers as well as of the Bufflehead and the goldeneyes. It nests in tree cavities&#8212;mostly old woodpecker holes&#8212;across the taiga belt of northern Eurasia, wintering south into temperate zones, where it prefers freshwater sites.

Smews visit the Aleutians annually in small numbers, but they are extremely rare winter visitors to the rest of North America outside Alaska. Washington&#8217;s first record was found in Skamania County in two successive winters (December 1989 and January&#8211;February 1991). This bird was also observed on the other side of the Columbia River in Oregon. The second Washington record was at McKenna (Pierce County) in March 1993. A second Oregon record occurred in 2001. California has about three records and British Columbia about five.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								smew				
280	6	Mergus	merganser	Common Merganser	Common resident.	LC	Numbers appear to be stable across North America, and the Christmas Bird Count has reflected a slight increase in Washington in recent years. Common Mergansers are an important indicator of the health of wetlands. Habitat degradation can remove nesting cavities. River channelization increases sediment in the water. Agriculture and industry often alter water quality.  All of these affect the Common Merganser, as well as many other species. Common Mergansers have come under fire for preying on salmon, but studies in British Columbia show that the most common prey item there for Common Mergansers is the sculpin.	The Common Merganser is a fish-eating duck that rides low in the water on freshwater lakes and rivers. The male in breeding plumage has a white belly, breast, and flanks with a gray rump and black back. The crestless head is dark green, the bill is red, and the eye is dark. The female Common Merganser has a solid gray body with a reddish-brown head. She has a narrow, red, serrate bill and white chin-patch at the base of the lower mandible. The short crest of the female is often not obvious. The male in non-breeding plumage is similar to the female, with some white on his back. Juveniles are also similar, but have a white bar across the face.		1	Range-wide, Common Mergansers prefer fresh water in all seasons. They use deep, clear, forested lakes, reservoirs, and rivers for breeding. In winter, they occupy similar habitat, as well as bays, coastal estuaries, and harbors. They frequent salt-water habitats in Washington in the winter.	Common Mergansers are common breeders in appropriate habitat on both sides of the Cascades. They do not appear to breed in the dry regions of the Columbia Basin, but non-breeding birds can be found there in the summer. In winter, they can be found throughout the state in appropriate habitat where water remains open throughout the year. They are abundant during this time in the Strait of Juan de Fuca and in Puget Sound.	Common Mergansers often form large rafts, or floating flocks, in the winter. They dive and swim under water, finding most of their food by sight.	Fish make up the majority of the diet of adult birds. Aquatic insects are a primary source of food for young birds. Mussels, crustaceans, and other aquatic creatures are also eaten.	Common in freshwater habitats in King County, mostly at low and moderate elevations but with a few records from high-elevation forest zones. No confirmed BBA records in Kitsap County, and apparently absent from Island County as breeder. In Kittitas County, common in larger river corridors, on large lakes, and along Columbia River. Requires nesting cavities in good-sized trees, preferably adjacent to fairly large rivers or large lakes.	Females usually start breeding in their second year. Pair bonds form in late winter or early spring. Nests are located near water, usually in a large tree cavity, but may also be in rock crevices, under tree roots, and in nest boxes. Nests are made of wood chips and other debris found in the cavity. Down is added by the female. The female usually lays 9 to 12 eggs, although nest parasitism is common. Incubation lasts from 28 to 35 days, and is done by the female alone. The male usually remains near the nest until incubation begins, and rarely stays with the brood once they hatch. The young jump from the cavity within a day or so of hatching and head for the water. The female leads the young to food, and they feed themselves. The young feed mostly by dabbling at first, but after about a week can dive well. Females usually abandon the young before they can fly, sometimes as early as the end of the first week. Broods often join together in crèches after they are about a week old.	Most Common Mergansers migrate short to medium distances in small groups. The post-breeding molt migration of males is not well understood, but it is thought that they migrate north to large lakes, bays, and rivers. Females molt alone after they leave their broods. The migration of the Common Merganser takes place late in the fall and early in the spring. Adult males seem to winter farther north than females and juvenile birds.	common_merganser	COME			
281	6	Mergus	serrator	Red-breasted Merganser	Common winter on coast. Uncommon fall and winter east.	LC	Breeding populations in the North Pacific seem to have increased over the last ten years. Hunting is not a major source of mortality, but a number have been shot illegally due to their suspected impact on salmon and other commercial fish. The extent of their impact is not known, but it is not likely that they are causing significant salmon mortality.	The ragged-crested Red-breasted Merganser winters in Washington but breeds farther to the north. The adult male in breeding plumage has a reddish-brown mottled breast, white neck collar, green head, and red eyes. The serrate orange bill is very thin. The back is black and white, and the flanks are gray. The female has an overall gray body, reddish-brown head, and reddish eyes. There is no obvious white chin-patch as in the female Common Merganser. The juvenile is similar to the female but has a white bar across its face. Non-breeding adult males appear similar to females as well.		1	Breeding habitat is in the tundra and boreal-forest zones. Breeding occurs on fresh, brackish, and saltwater wetlands and in sheltered bays. During migration and in winter, Red-breasted Mergansers occur mostly on salt water, in coastal bays, estuaries, and other protected coastal areas.	Red-breasted Mergansers can be found during migration on major lakes in eastern Washington, especially at Banks Lake (Grant County). They are much more common in western and coastal Washington during migration and in winter. They are abundant in Puget Sound and the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and in major estuaries along the outer coast.	Red-breasted Mergansers are typically found in small flocks, rather than huge rafts.  They forage by diving and swimming under water, sometimes in cooperative groups, working schools of fish into shallow water.	While the young eat mostly aquatic insects, adults primarily eat fish. Crustaceans and other aquatic creatures are also eaten.		Females first breed at the age of two years. Pairs generally form in late winter and during spring migration, although some evidence of pairing may be evident in the late fall. Breeding is late in the season, and often the young do not fledge until September. The nest is located in a sheltered spot on the ground, usually near water. It is a simple depression lined with vegetation and down. The female lays 7 to 10 eggs, and sometimes lays eggs in the nests of other females. Males usually leave when incubation begins. Incubation is by the female alone and lasts for 28 to 35 days. Within a day or so of hatching, the young follow the female to water where they feed themselves. Often, in areas of high-density nesting, two or more broods will join and form a crèche, with one or more females tending them. Within a few weeks, the females typically abandon the young, who cannot fly until they are about two months old.	Red-breasted Mergansers usually migrate in pairs or small flocks. Males leave the breeding grounds in mid-summer on their molt migration, but the destinations are not known. Spring migration begins in March and peaks in April, continuing into May. Birds are typically on the breeding grounds by mid- to late May.  In the fall, birds start arriving in September, although most birds arrive on the wintering grounds in late November.	red-breasted_merganser	RBME			
282	33	Mimus	polyglottos	Northern Mockingbird	Rare resident.	LC	Northern Mockingbirds have declined in some southern parts of their range in recent decades, while at the same time expanding northward into other areas.  They were captured and sold as caged birds from the late 1700s through the early 1900s, a practice that significantly reduced northern populations.  Since the International Migratory Bird Treaty Act outlawed their capture, Northern Mockingbirds have been expanding back into their former range, and into new areas.  This expansion is likely to continue with the spread of suburban and second-growth habitat, and ornamental plantings that provide food and cover.  Northern Mockingbirds were formerly considered only vagrants in Washington, but have been recorded annually in Washington since the mid-1980s, and have nested a few times in the Columbia Basin.	Northern Mockingbirds are primarily gray with long legs, long tails, and pale eyes.  Their undersides are light buff to white, and their upperparts are plain gray.  Their tails are black with white outer tail feathers, and their wings are black with white wing-bars and patches.  Young juveniles have light spotting on their breasts.		1	Northern Mockingbirds typically inhabit dense, low shrubs and areas with open ground.  Throughout their range, they are common in suburban areas and parks with short grass.  They avoid the forest interior, but can often be found at forest edges.  In Washington, they often inhabit sagebrush habitat.	Northern Mockingbirds can be found rarely at any time of year in Washington, but they are most often found in winter.  Winter sightings have come from both sides of the Cascades, although they are more common in western Washington.  Northern Mockingbirds have, however, nested in eastern Washington's central Columbia Basin at least three times (in Benton and Grant Counties).	Northern Mockingbirds are ground foragers and are commonly seen running across mowed lawns, with their wings lifted to flash their white wing-patches.  Both sexes sing complex and variable songs, with each phrase often repeated many times.  They are accomplished mimics and incorporate parts of other birds' songs into their own.	The Northern Mockingbird's diet is split evenly over the course of the year into fruit and invertebrates.  Invertebrates, especially beetles, grasshoppers, spiders, snails, and worms, make up most of the diet during the breeding season, while berries and other fruits round out the winter diet.		Northern Mockingbirds are typically monogamous, but polygamy does occur.  Some birds may remain paired year round, but pair bonds typically last a single breeding season.  They nest in dense shrubs or low trees.  The male builds a bulky foundation of twigs, and the female adds an open cup of weeds, grass, and leaves, lined with rootlets, moss, hair, and plant down.  The female incubates 3-4 eggs for 12-13 days, and then broods the young for about 6 days after they hatch.  Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest at about 12 days.  The young cannot fly well for another week or so, and the adults continue to feed the fledglings for up to 3 weeks after they leave the nest.  Northern Mockingbirds can raise up to 4 broods in a season.  A few days after the young fledge, the male begins building the foundation for the next nest, while the female continues feeding the fledglings.  Once the foundation is built, they switch, and the female builds the rest of the nest while the male feeds the fledglings.	The migration of Northern Mockingbirds is not well understood.  They are resident in some parts of their range, but in others, they undertake some southward movement in the fall.  Still others travel north in the fall and winter, complicating the issue even more.	northern_mockingbird	NOMO			
283	41	Mniotilta	varia	Black-and-white Warbler		LC		Streaked all over black-and-white, this rare visitor to Washington is somewhat reminiscent of our resident Black-throated Gray Warbler but with the addition of a white central crown stripe and a white-streaked back, and without the Black-throated Gray&#8217;s yellow spot in front of the eye. It is also more elongated and flat-headed in appearance and has a telltale habit of hitching along bark and branches, rather like a nuthatch.

The Black-and-white Warbler nests in a variety of deciduous and mixed forest habitats east of the Rocky Mountains, from the northern tree line to the edge of the Gulf coastal plain. It winters from Florida and the Greater Antilles through much of Mexico and Central America to northwestern South America and is one of the more frequent &#8220;eastern&#8221; warbler vagrants in the West. It breeds in northeastern British Columbia and occurs casually elsewhere in the province. In Idaho and Oregon it is a rare but annual visitor and is no longer on the review list in either state. Washington has close to 30 accepted records; many others have not been reviewed by the state bird records committee. Half of the accepted records are from May and June, while the remainder are spread across every month from August to March. Eastside records outnumber westside records by about 3:2.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								black-and-white_warbler				
284	30	Molothrus	ater	Brown-headed Cowbird	Common summer resident. Uncommon winter.	LC	Brown-headed Cowbirds are presently far more abundant and widespread in North America than they were historically. They are relative newcomers to Washington. Although they may have been in the state in small numbers, they are generally considered to have arrived in the Columbia Basin in the late 1800s, and were regularly seen in western Washington by 1955. By 1958 they were breeding in western Washington. Development and forest fragmentation have allowed Brown-headed Cowbirds to enter new areas and exploit new host-species. A cowbird in the nest typically means less food for the host's young, as the cowbird chick is larger and more demanding. Some, or all, of the host's own young usually die as a result of lack of resources. This has had a significant impact on some species that are common cowbird hosts. Some species, including Cedar Waxwings, Gray Catbirds, Bullock's Orioles, American Robins, and jays actually recognize and eject cowbird eggs when they appear in their nests. They might instead build a new nest over the top of the old one with the cowbird egg. Many other species are not so fortunate and Brown-headed Cowbirds are considered one of the most important causes of Songbird decline in North America. The Yellow Warbler and the Song Sparrow are the two most often parasitized species in the United States. There has been a significant decline in the cowbird population in Washington between 1966 and 2002, although they are still common and widespread.	The Brown-headed Cowbird is well known--and widely disliked--for its practice of laying eggs in the nests of other species. Males are black birds with dull brown heads. Adult males are shiny black, while first-year males are duller black. Females are much smaller and solid brown with a whitish throat and light streaking on their undersides. Juveniles look similar to females, but are more heavily streaked with lighter bellies and light edging on their wing feathers. Cowbirds have more finch-like conical beaks than other blackbirds.		1	Brown-headed Cowbirds forage in open areas and breed in open woodlands or scattered trees, so they are most common at edge areas where they can be close to both types of habitat. They are particularly common in streamside thickets and woods adjacent to agricultural fields, although they can be found in most habitats with the exception of the forest interior. Historically, they inhabited short-grass prairies, but with development, agriculture, and forest fragmentation, they have been able to expand their range significantly and now prefer human-modified habitats.	Brown-headed Cowbirds are generally summer residents in appropriate habitat throughout Washington, arriving in mid-April. Most leave by September, but some may overwinter in the Puget Trough. You can typically find them at feedlots with flocks of other blackbirds, in coastal areas, or along the Columbia River east of the Cascades.	Historically, Brown-headed Cowbirds probably followed herds of bison, walking behind them to take advantage of food kicked up in the bison's wake. Now they follow cattle and other large grazers in much the same way. They almost always forage on the ground, but also lurk about in trees and bushes, mostly watching quietly for nests to parasitize.	During the summer, about half of the Brown-headed Cowbirds' diet is made up of seeds, and the other half consists of insects and other invertebrates. Their winter diet is made up of more than 90% seeds and waste grain. Females also eat eggshells from the nests where they lay their eggs and mollusk shells, especially during the breeding season. This practice may provide the calcium they need to produce the large number of eggs they lay.	Common in open landscapes and highly fragmented forest at low to middle elevation, but largely absent from intact, moist conifer forest. Most concentrated in agricultural and developed landscapes in western counties and in steppe, rangeland, and open forests of Kittitas County. Obligate brood parasite, laying eggs in nests of other species. Host species not always determined by BBA observers, but following noted: Dusky Flycatcher, Warbling and Red-eyed Vireos, Golden-crowned Kinglet, American Robin, Nashville, Yellow-rumped, Black-throated Gray, and MacGillivray's Warblers, Common Yellowthroat, Western Tanager, Spotted Towhee, Song and White-crowned Sparrows, Dark-eyed Junco, Brewer's Blackbird, House Finch.	Brown-headed Cowbirds have unusual breeding behavior: they never build nests or raise their own young. Males typically arrive on the breeding grounds before the females. Pairs are generally monogamous. Females lay eggs in other birds' nests and leave the rearing to other species. They find nests to parasitize by looking for birds building nests, either by walking along the ground, perching quietly in shrubs or trees, or making noisy flights back and forth, possibly to flush potential hosts. The female generally chooses an open cup-nest to parasitize, and usually lays one egg per nest. She waits to lay the egg until the host bird has at least one egg in its nest, and often removes one egg from the nest before laying her own. She continues the process over a period of about a month and can lay up to 40 eggs a season. Incubation time is short, 10 to 12 days, which allows the young cowbird to get a head start in the nest. Young cowbirds grow rapidly, giving them a competitive advantage over the other young in the nest. Young cowbirds usually leave the nest after 8 to 13 days, but are not fully independent from the hosts until they are about 25 to 39 days old. Then they typically form small flocks with other juveniles. Over 220 species have been observed with Brown-headed Cowbird eggs in their nests, and at least 144 species have raised Brown-headed Cowbird young to the fledgling stage, often at the expense of their own young.	Brown-headed Cowbirds are typically short- to medium-distance migrants, but may be present year-round in some parts of their range, including eastern Washington feedlots. In western Washington, huge numbers are seen in the Kent area (King County). They often migrate in flocks with other blackbird species.	brown-headed_cowbird	BHCO			
285	34	Momotus	momota	Blue-crowned Motmot		LC				0								blue-crowned_motmot				
286	35	Motacilla	alba	White Wagtail		LC		Casual visitor from November to May, mostly in spring. Almost all records are from Puget Sound or outer coast with one from east slope of Cascades. Half are of Black-backed subspecies, until recently considered a separate species.		1								white_wagtail				
287	35	Motacilla	tschutschensis	Eastern Yellow Wagtail		LC		Two records (late July, mid-September), both from Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County).		1								eastern_yellow_wagtail				
288	67	Myadestes	townsendi	Townsend's Solitaire	Fairly common summer. Uncommon winter.	LC	Limited human access to the rugged terrain where Townsend's Solitaires make their home renders it difficult to assess the status of the population. This same limited access also protects species that live in such a remote habitat. The species is widespread, and there do not appear to be any obvious population declines. Townsend's Solitaires are not known to be area-sensitive or subject to edge effects, but there has been little study in this area to date, and more data are needed to determine the effects of forestry on the Townsend's Solitaire.	Gray overall with a tail edged in white on the sides, the Townsend's Solitaire is a nondescript bird. Males and females look alike, and both have white eye-rings and dark wingtips accented with cream.  Perching birds show buffy wing-patches.  In flight, buffy wing-stripes are evident.		1	The Townsend's Solitaire requires a combination of steep banks for nest sites, open forests where it catches aerial prey, and tall trees to perch on. This combination is most often found in high-elevation, dry, coniferous forests throughout Washington, and in the mid-elevation dry forests of eastern Washington. Townsend's Solitaires are also found in wetter areas if the terrain is rugged enough to produce a patchy, open forest.	In breeding season, Townsend's Solitaires are common in high-elevation forested areas throughout Washington, including high-elevation alpine parkland areas along the Cascade crest, and near Mount Rainier and other major volcanoes. They can be found in the northeast Olympic Mountains where they nest above 3,500 feet, although they are absent from the wet forests in the western and southern Olympics, which aren't as steep at the northeast part of the range. In eastern Washington, Townsend's Solitaires can also be found in lower-elevation forests, such as the Dishman Hills area near Spokane. They are common in the eastern Blue Mountains, but uncommon in the western Blue Mountains above 2,000 feet. They are fairly common migrants on the San Juan Islands in a very limited window of time each spring. You can see them in the foothills on the west side of the Cascades in early spring, waiting to go up the stream courses.	In migration and during dispersal, Townsend's Solitaires may form small flocks. Usually seen alone, defending territories in the winter as well as in the breeding season, the Townsend's Solitaire perches upright high in a tree. From this perch, the male sings to defend his territory. The Townsend's Solitaire flies from a perch to catch flying insects, or pounces on prey on the ground. It also may hover while gleaning food from the surface of leaves and twigs.	In winter, the Townsend's Solitaire eats mostly berries.  Insects make up the majority of the diet in summer.	Not recorded in Kitsap, Island, and lowland King Counties. In eastern King County, uncommon in higher-elevation forested areas, where pattern of scattered records nicely supports range predicted by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Fairly common in Kittitas County in dry, open forested habitats at middle to high elevations. Townsend's Solitaires often build nests on soil banks along forest road cuts.	Ground-nesters, Townsend's Solitaires nest in a shallow depression in a dirt bank or road cut, in a cliff crevice, under a stump or log, or amid upturned roots--basically any protected spot on the ground with overhanging shelter. The nest is a bulky, loosely made open cup of twigs, grass, pine needles, and bark strips, lined with soft grass. The female incubates the 4 eggs for about 11 days. Both parents feed the young, although only the female broods.	Some Townsend's Solitaires migrate altitudinally, but most migrate latitudinally.  Most of Washington's birds leave the state in the winter.  Washington is also the winter home of birds that breed farther north.  The winter range varies from year to year based on the berry supply, and can extend far south into Mexico.  The seasonal shift takes place in early spring and late fall.	townsends_solitaire	TOSO			
289	68	Myiarchus	cinerascens	Ash-throated Flycatcher	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	The first record of an Ash-throated Flycatcher in Washington was in Yakima County in 1903. South-central Washington is currently the northernmost extension of their range, although they may once have ranged as far north as Okanogan County. Numbers appear to be stable throughout their range, and their adaptability to artificial nest boxes may help them. There are anecdotal reports of bluebirds and House Wrens taking over the nests of Ash-throated Flycatchers.	This large, long-tailed flycatcher has a pale yellow belly, gray breast and head, and rufous on its wings and tail. Other flycatchers in the same crested-flycatcher genus appear similar, but none are found in Washington, rendering identification in this state fairly easy.		1	The Ash-throated Flycatcher is typically a bird of open, arid habitats, although in Washington, it is restricted to a small band of Garry oak and streamside woodlands in the southeastern Cascade foothills.	Ash-throated Flycatchers are patchily distributed in a small area of Washington. A few pairs can be found in Yakima, Kittitas, Chelan, Grant, and Adams Counties, although the majority of the population nests in south-central Klickitat County near rivers and in oak stands, such as along Rock Creek.	Much of the time Ash-throated Flycatchers sit still and are inconspicuous. When foraging, they sit on a branch and fly out in short bursts to glean prey from low foliage, branches, or the ground. Unlike many flycatchers, they seldom catch food in mid-air.	Insects are the most common food, although they may eat some fruits and berries.	Typically nests in snags in open riparian or oak woodland at low elevations east of Cascade crest. In Kittitas County, no confirmed BBA records but one probable and one possible from Colockum Wildlife Area adjacent to Columbia River. After close of atlas period, another bird observed repeatedly along Old Vantage Highway during 2003 and 2004 nesting seasons. Northernmost confirmed nesting just north of our area near Wenatchee in Chelan County. Has also nested along Umtanum Road just south of Kittitas County line in Yakima County. Fairly common in Washington only in Klickitat County.	Ash-throated Flycatchers nest in tree cavities or nest boxes. Both members of the pair help build the nest, which is a mass of twigs, rootlets, and weeds, lined with soft feathers and hair. The female incubates four to five eggs for about 15 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest and begin to fly at 14 to 16 days. The parents continue to feed the young for a few days after they leave the nest, and often raise a second brood.	Some Ash-throated Flycatchers winter in southwestern Arizona and southern California, but many migrate to Mexico. They begin to leave Washington in mid-August and start to return in mid-May.	ash-throated_flycatcher				
290	18	Nucifraga	columbiana	Clark's Nutcracker	Fairly common resident.	LC	Due to the remote range of Clark's Nutcrackers, their population status is not well understood. Populations fluctuate from year to year, primarily due to food availability. They are a major seed disperser for whitebark pine.	Clark's Nutcrackers are medium-sized birds with long, sharp bills. The Clark's Nutcracker is the size of a jay but is more like a crow in build and flight.  Its body is primarily gray. It has black wings, and black down the center of its tail. The outer tail feathers and the undersides of the tail are white, and there are white wing patches at the trailing edges of the wings.		1	Clark's Nutcrackers can be found in two distinct types of habitat in Washington. Both types are characterized by dry, open, pine forest. Their primary habitat is high-elevation whitebark pine forest near the upper tree line, and the other, secondary habitat, is ponderosa pine forest at the lower tree line.	Clark's Nutcrackers are common in the alpine and sub-alpine zone around Mount Rainier, in the Cascades, especially on the eastern slopes, and in the Okanogan Highlands. They can be found as vagrants on the Olympic Peninsula'there is a small, resident population in the northeastern Olympic Mountains. They are found uncommonly in the eastern Blue Mountains.	Clark's Nutcrackers have excellent spatial memory, which enables them to cache up to 33,000 seeds in the fall, and then locate a large percentage of those during the winter. Caches are generally buried in the soil on exposed slopes. These birds can find their caches up to nine months later. They are not totally efficient at finding their caches, however, so they function as a seed disperser as well. When collecting seeds to cache, a bird can store as many as 90 seeds in a pouch behind its tongue. When full, the pouch forms a large bulge at the throat. The caches allow Clark's Nutcrackers to remain at high elevations year round, and to start their breeding season very early. They are bold around humans, often coming to picnic, camping, and ski areas to beg for handouts.	Clark's Nutcrackers are omnivores, although the vast majority of their diet is pine seeds. They also eat other seeds, nuts, berries, insects, eggs and nestlings of other birds, and carrion. The young are fed predominantly seeds.	Fairly common near timberline at and east of Cascade crest, where particularly associated with whitebark pine. At lower elevations may also use ponderosa pine near cliffs. One BBA record well west of crest of pair on ridge north of Tolt Reservoir at 3,600 feet elevation.	Clark's Nutcrackers are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds. Pairs stay together on their territories year round. They begin nesting in late winter; relying on the food they have cached to raise their young. They typically nest in a conifer tree, generally in a fork at the outer branches. Both members of the pair help build the nest, which is a platform of twigs and bark, with a well-insulated cup made of bark strips and grass, with pine needles on top. Both members of the pair incubate the 2-5 eggs for about 18 days, and then brood the young for their first 10-11 days. Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest at about 20 days. The young remain with the parents until they are 3½ -4 months old. Juvenile independence usually corresponds to when the year's seed crop becomes available, and they quickly start building their own caches for the following winter.	Some elevational migration is common, and irruptions can occur in years when food is less abundant. After the young fledge in late spring, most Clark's Nutcrackers move upslope to sub-alpine zones, and then move back down in the fall.	clarks_nutcracker				
291	57	Numenius	americanus	Long-billed Curlew	Uncommon summer east. Uncommon winter west.	LC	Once abundant, Long-billed Curlews declined as a result of hunting in the 1800s. Protection has helped the birds rebound, and now habitat destruction is their biggest threat.  As more and more native grassland is converted to agriculture, the amount of potential Long-billed Curlew nesting habitat is shrinking. The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the current population at about 20,000 birds.	The Long-billed Curlew is the largest North American shorebird. It has a very long, decurved bill, which is longer on adult females than on males and juveniles. It is mottled brown overall, with cinnamon underwings. Sometimes a striped head pattern is evident, but it is far less pronounced than the head stripes on the Whimbrel.  It is similar in size, shape, and color to the Marbled Godwit, but the curlew's decurved bill distinguishes it from the upturned bill of the Marbled Godwit.		1	Dry grasslands and shrub savannahs are the traditional breeding habitats of Long-billed Curlews. They also nest in grain fields and pastures. During migration and winter, they can be found on coastal mudflats and marshes, and less commonly in fields and grasslands.	Long-billed Curlews breed in eastern Washington in the central Columbia Basin and up through the Okanogan Valley.  They are uncommon throughout the state during migration. They generally winter south of Washington, but a flock winters around Tokeland at Willapa Bay (Pacific County) every winter.  Bill's Spit at Ocean Shores is another place to look for them.	These birds often gather in small flocks and forage by walking quickly along with their long bills extended forward, probing for food.	In summer, earthworms and other invertebrates are common prey.  Berries may also be important food at certain times of the year.  Birds in coastal areas eat crabs and other aquatic creatures.	Uncommon in agricultural and range lands in Kittitas County. Confirmed nesting sites in Kittitas Valley, with nesting likely at a few locations along west shore of Columbia River. Absent as breeder west of Cascades.	Males attract females and defend their territories with undulating flight displays, fluttering and gliding while calling.  The nest is on the ground in the open, but is often located next to an object such a rock, a shrub, or even a pile of cow manure.  The nest itself is a shallow scrape, usually sparsely lined with vegetation, sometimes with a rim built up around the edge.  Both parents help incubate the four eggs for 27-30 days. The young leave the nest shortly after hatching and feed themselves, although both parents tend them and lead them to a marshy or damp area to find food.  The young begin to fly at 32-45 days.	This short-distance migrant is one of the earliest breeding shorebirds, returning from wintering grounds from California to Mexico in mid-March, before their nesting grounds dry out.  The adults leave by mid-July, with the young of the year leaving in mid-August.	long-billed_curlew				
292	57	Numenius	minutus	Little Curlew		LC		One record, a bird seen briefly at Leadbetter Point Point (Pacific County), in May 2001.		1								little_curlew				
293	57	Numenius	phaeopus	Whimbrel	Fairly common migrant. Rare winter west. Casual migrant east.	LC	Whimbrels breed around the world at high northern latitudes. The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the worldwide population at 797,000 birds and the North American population at 57,000.  They have a widespread range and can be found on the coasts of six continents in the winter.  Hunting in the 19th Century reduced the population. The ban on hunting in North America has resulted in a population rebound, but apparently not back to historic levels.  While they are still being hunted for food in parts of South America, Whimbrels are now more seriously threatened by habitat destruction, disturbance, and environmental contaminants.  The Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network is working to identify and protect important shorebird wintering and migration stopover areas, and this may help to protect Whimbrels. The current population trend is uncertain, and more monitoring is needed to understand their current status.	Whimbrels are large shorebirds with long, decurved bills. They are smaller in size than the similar-looking Long-billed Curlew, and their bills are shorter.  The Whimbrel has a distinct head pattern, with dark-and-light alternating stripes.  The rest of its plumage is plain mottled-brown overall, and does not vary season to season.  In flight, it appears brown all over, with a white belly.  Its bill is solid black in summer and has a pinkish or reddish base during winter.		1	Whimbrels nest in the tundra, not far from the tree line, in a variety of open habitats from wet lowlands to dry uplands. During migration, they use wetlands, dry, short grasslands, farmland (especially plowed fields), and rocky shores.  During winter, they are mostly found in coastal areas, on exposed reefs, sandy or rocky beaches, estuaries, and especially mudflats.	Whimbrels are seen in Washington mostly during migration, but there are a few winter records from the coast. Some non-breeding birds summer on the coast as well. Migrating birds start coming through the Washington outer coast and Puget Sound in early April, are common from mid-April through mid-May, and then taper off through the end of May.  The southward migration starts in late June, and they are common on the coast through mid-August.  After this, they taper off and are uncommon until the end of October.  In eastern Washington, migrating Whimbrels are fairly rare, but can be seen from mid-April to early June, and then again from late June through the end of August.  They are more likely to be seen on the trip north than on the trip south.  In western Washington, they are more common in spring in the protected waters of Puget Sound and the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Fall migrants are more likely to be found in coastal estuaries such as Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County) and Willapa Bay (Pacific County), although they do occur along inland marine waters as well.	In spring, Whimbrels may congregate in farmlands in groups of up to several hundred. They probe into the mud for their food, and pick food from the surface more often than do other curlews. Whimbrels feed singly or in small groups on mudflats at low tide. Then at high tide, they gather and roost in dense flocks, often flying long distances between roosting and feeding areas.	During breeding season, Whimbrels eat primarily insects. Later in summer, they also eat berries.  Their migration and wintering diet consists of worms and grubs, crabs, and other small aquatic organisms.  Fiddler Crabs are an important food during winter, and the shape of the Whimbrel's bill matches the curve of the crab's burrow.		These monogamous birds nest in loose colonies, but remain territorial during the nesting season.  Males use dramatic flight displays and songs to attract females.  They nest on the ground, usually in a raised hummock or at the base of a small shrub.  The female generally builds the nest, which is a shallow scrape lined with lichen, leaves, moss, or grass. Both parents help incubate the 4 eggs for 24-28 days.  The young leave the nest soon after hatching and feed themselves. Both parents tend and defend the young, although the female generally leaves the brood first, and the male stays with them until they can fly, at 4-6 weeks.	Adults leave the nesting grounds in July, and the young of the year typically follow a month later.  Whimbrels are commonly found inland during migration, although they winter coastally.  During migration, the population tends to congregate at a few favored spots. The population breeding in North America winters along the Pacific Coast, from southern Oregon to the southern tip of South America.  The birds travel northward from March through May.	whimbrel	WHIM			
294	57	Numenius	tahitiensis	Bristle-thighed Curlew		VU		A dozen or more individuals observed the length of outer coast, in May 1998. One prior record from Leadbetter Point (Pacific County), in May 1982.		1								bristle-thighed_curlew				
295	8	Nyctanassa	violacea	Yellow-crowned Night-Heron		LC		Two records, Walla Walla (Walla Walla County) in May-June 1993 and Wenatchee (Chelan County) in September 2001.		1								yellow-crowned_night-heron				
296	8	Nycticorax	nycticorax	Black-crowned Night-Heron	Common resident east. Rare winter west.	LC	Black-crowned Night-Herons are a cosmopolitan species, nesting on every continent except Australia and Antarctica.  Declines in the mid-20th Century have been attributed to habitat loss and pesticide contamination.  Since the ban of DDT in this country, populations have increased although water pollution and habitat loss continue to be a problem in some areas.  Still considered widespread and common in North America, the population is now probably stable or increasing, but their nocturnal and inconspicuous nature makes it difficult to survey the population.	Adult Black-crowned Night-Herons have pale gray bellies and wings and black backs.  Their faces are white with a black cap, topped by a white plume. They have black bills and red eyes. Juveniles are mottled in gray, brown, and white coloring and have streaked breasts.  One-year-old birds have an intermediate plumage somewhat between that of juveniles and adults.  Black-crowned Night-Herons have short necks that are often pulled in, giving the birds a somewhat thick-set appearance for a heron.		1	Black-crowned Night-herons inhabit a variety of fresh and saltwater wetlands.  In Washington, they breed primarily in freshwater areas.  In spring and fall, they can be found in wetlands flanking large river basins.  Winter habitat is varied, but these herons frequent forested swamps.	As a breeding bird, the Black-crowned Night-Heron is mostly limited to the central and southern Columbia Basin, where it is common in appropriate habitat.  Breeding is common at Potholes and McNary National Wildlife Refuges and uncommon along the Walla Walla, Touchet, and other rivers and creeks flowing through Walla Walla County.  Although a rare occurrence, Black-crowned Night-herons have been known to breed in western Washington's eastern Puget Trough lowlands.  In the winter, they are reported occasionally at Grays Harbor and around Olympia.  Winter roosts are also found in the Tri-Cities area and along the Columbia River.  They also winter in small numbers on Fir Island (Skagit County).  For many years there has been one aberant regular winter roost within the town of Stanwood (Snohomish County), but it has not been occupied for several years.	Black-crowned Night-herons are gregarious at all times of the year, and are often seen in very large groups.  As their name implies, they are mostly nocturnal, roosting during the day in trees or marshes, and foraging at night, especially at dusk and dawn.  They have also been seen feeding during the day, a practice most common during the demanding nesting season.  When foraging, they usually stand still or walk slowly at the edge of shallow water, waiting for their prey.  They will also perch above the water to fish.  Birds return year after year to traditional winter roost sites.	Although the diet of the Black-crowned Night-heron is varied, fish are the predominant prey.  Squid, crustaceans, aquatic insects, frogs, snakes, birds, rodents, and carrion round out the diet.	No BBA records for Kittitas County, although projected to breed there along Columbia River by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Single BBA record in Island County at northeastern tip of Camano Island (T32N R3E S22), derived from report of juveniles observed in nesting colony several summers running through 1990, provides only known breeding record for western Washington. Accepted by Smith et al. (1997), but lack of supporting details constrains us to treat it as hypothetical (possible, not confirmed). Several small Black-crowned Night-Heron winter roosts well documented close by in Snohomish and Skagit Counties over last twenty years.	Black-crowned Night-herons typically nest on islands or in groups of trees.  Young birds start to breed at two years of age.  Like most herons, they nest in colonies, often mixed with other species.  Their nesting season begins earlier than that of other herons, but is highly variable.  The male picks a site and displays to attract a female.  Once paired, the male brings nesting material to the female, and she builds the stick nest.  Both parents incubate the 3 to 5 eggs for 24 to 26 days.  Once the young hatch, both male and female feed them by regurgitation.  For the first 10 days of the chicks' lives, they are brooded almost continuously by one of the parents.  At the age of four weeks, the young climb about around the nest.  First flight occurs at about 5 weeks, and the young will follow the adults to foraging areas and beg for food for another few weeks.	After the breeding season, some birds wander northward.  Northern populations migrate south to milder climates in the winter.  In much of Washington, they are permanent residents.	black-crowned_night-heron				
297	37	Oceanites	oceanicus	Wilson's Storm-Petrel		LC		Two records, both off Westport (Grays Harbor County), July 1984 and September 2001.		1								wilsons_storm-petrel				
298	29	Oceanodroma	furcata	Fork-tailed Storm-Petrel	Fairly common pelagic, breeds outer islands.	LC	While still abundant in the north Pacific, the Fork-tailed Storm-Petrel is at the southern edge of its range in Washington, and only about 2,000 pairs nest here. Introduced rat populations may have had a negative effect on some island colonies. El Niño and other water temperature changes may also have a significant impact on the population.	The Fork-tailed Storm-Petrel is a small, silver-gray seabird. Its body is solid light gray, and the wings have dark and light gray patterns. The bird has a short, dark bill, a tube-nose, and black around its eye.		1	The Fork-tailed Storm-Petrel is found off the Pacific Coast. During the breeding season, Fork-tailed Storm-Petrels nest in colonies on small Pacific islets with enough soil in which to dig nest-burrows. They forage on the open ocean over the continental shelf and farther out to sea.	Colonies are located on five islands off the outer coast of the Olympic Peninsula, four in Clallam County and one in Jefferson County. Each colony ranges from 40 to almost a thousand breeding pairs. The birds are active at their nests at night, so it is very difficult to observe them on the breeding colonies. The best way to see Fork-tailed Storm-Petrels in Washington is on boat trips from April through October, when they are fairly common over the continental shelf.	Storm-petrels flutter low over offshore waves, sometimes in flocks, where they pluck food from the water's surface. They also feed while swimming. Fork-tailed Storm-Petrels are able to fly well in winter storms, cutting through the wave troughs, thus they are less likely to be found inland after storms than are other species of storm-petrel.	Fish, crustaceans, and floating animal oils make up the diet of the Fork-tailed Storm-Petrel. It skims oily fat from the surface of the water and eats carrion or other floating refuse.		Colony nesters, Fork-tailed Storm-Petrels are often intermixed in Leach's Storm-Petrel colonies. In March and April, the birds return to the breeding colonies. They excavate burrows in soil or use natural rock crevices, or they may use old burrows. Sometimes two or more pairs have nests in side tunnels branching off from a common entrance. The nest chamber is sometimes lined with grass, but often does not have any lining. The female lays one egg, which both parents take turns incubating. Incubation lasts from 37-68 days. (Incubation may be interrupted for days at a time, accounting for the large variance.) Both parents feed the chick by regurgitation. At first the chick is fed oily stomach discharge, and later meals are made up of partially digested fish. Seven to nine weeks after hatching, the chick heads to sea. If the adults do not return regularly with sufficient food, the chick will go into torpor. The ability of the egg to survive with suspended incubation and for the chick to become torpid are important for survival, since the adults spend a lot of time away from the nest looking for food that can be hard to find.	Dispersal from breeding colonies peaks from late August to early September, although Fork-tailed Storm-Petrels are not strongly migratory. Most remain in northern waters all year.	fork-tailed_storm-petrel				
299	29	Oceanodroma	homochroa	Ashy Storm-Petrel		EN		The first state record occurred on a pelagic trip off Westport on 24 June 2006.		1								ashy_storm-petrel				
300	29	Oceanodroma	leucorhoa	Leach's Storm-Petrel	Uncommon pelagic, breeds outer islands.	VU	The total population of Leach's Storm-Petrel is estimated in the millions, with over 8 million breeding pairs. There are an estimated 50,000 nesting birds in Washington in 11 confirmed colonies, although it is possible that there are as many as 25 colonies. The largest colony in Washington, on Jagged Island, consists of 20,000 birds. A major threat to the population is the introduction of predators, such as rats, to nesting islands. Upon removal of predators, storm-petrels appear to be able to re-colonize former breeding islands. Leach's Storm-Petrels are susceptible to pesticides and oil spills, and El Niño can also significantly reduce breeding productivity. Fishing nets are not a significant risk because Leach's Storm-Petrels rarely dive to catch prey. Annual numbers tend to fluctuate dramatically based on food supply and climate. Although the population at this time appears stable, its inconspicuous nature makes it very difficult to monitor the actual health of the population.	The Leach's Storm-Petrels found off the coast of Washington are dark, with long, slender wings. They have white rumps, unlike populations farther to the south, which have darker rumps. This storm-petrel appears uniformly dark from below, but from above, some color differentiation is evident. Its tail and flight feathers are black, and its back and head are dark brown. A lighter tan band runs diagonally down the middle of the wing, separating the brown from the black.		1	During the nesting season, Leach's Storm-Petrels inhabit small, offshore, island colonies in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. They nest in burrows, so these islands must offer sufficient soil or rock crevices. Outside the nesting season, they disperse over the open ocean, far from land, concentrating around upwellings and areas where cold and warm water meet. These areas are rich in food.	Although far more abundant, the Leach's Storm-Petrel is seen less frequently than the Fork-tailed Storm-Petrel, perhaps because it forages farther out to sea. In April and May, Washington breeders arrive on the breeding colonies, located off the coast of the Olympic Peninsula. Birds are seldom seen on the nesting islands however since their activity is nocturnal. The best way to see these tube-nosed seabirds is on an offshore boat trip. Occasionally a strong wind or storm will force large numbers closer to land, or in some cases, inland. Coastal and inland sightings, while still rare, are most likely in the fall. Boat trip sightings are most likely in July and August, uncommon in the spring (April and May), and rare in fall (September and October). Leach's Storm-Petrels are absent, for the most part, from Washington waters in the winter.	Unlike many other tube-nosed seabirds, Leach's Storm-Petrels do not regularly follow and scavenge from ships. They fly low over the water with irregular wing-beats and forage by taking food from the water while hovering or skimming the water's surface. They sometimes forage near feeding whales or seals, but seldom sit on the water to feed. They are difficult to observe on their nesting colonies since they enter and leave the colonies only at night.	Small crustaceans make up the majority of the diet, although small fish and squid are also taken. Oil and fat slicks from dead marine mammals are also sources of food for storm-petrels. They have a well-developed olfactory sense and can locate food sources by smell.		Long-lived birds, sometimes living more than 24 years, Leach's Storm-Petrels do not breed until they are at least four or five years old. Their nest burrows are situated under grass, rocks, or tree roots. Burrows are typically 1-3 feet long, and can be more than 5 feet long. The male digs the burrow, using his feet and bill. Neighboring burrows may be close together, sometimes sharing a common opening. Natural crevices may also be used. At the end of the burrow is a nest chamber that is lined with twigs, leaves, and grass. Both parents incubate the single egg. Incubation can last from 37-50 days, with an average of 42 days. (Incubation may be interrupted for days at a time, accounting for the large variance.) Both parents feed the young by regurgitating their stomach contents. If the adults do not return regularly with sufficient food, the chick will go into torpor. The ability of the egg to survive with suspended incubation and for the chick to become torpid are important for survival, since the adults spend a lot of time away from the nest looking for food that can be hard to find.  After 9-10 weeks, the fledglings leave the island and head to sea on their own.	The migratory patterns of the Leach's Storm-Petrel are not well known, although they appear to be more migratory than other storm-petrel species. Most of them move south to tropical waters in the fall and winter, but some are reported in northern areas throughout the year. In March the birds begin to return to northern waters. Millions of non-breeders (mostly immature birds) remain at sea year round.	leachs_storm-petrel				
301	36	Oenanthe	oenanthe	Northern Wheatear		LC		Washington&#8217;s first Northern Wheatear was found at Nisqually National Wildlife Refuge (Thurston County) on 4 September 2004.		1								northern_wheatear				
302	41	Oporornis	formosus	Kentucky Warbler		LC		A resident of damp, shady deciduous forests, the Kentucky Warbler hops on the ground on long legs, foraging in leaf litter and usually staying close to cover in dense undergrowth, although it may sing from exposed branches. It is a rather plain-looking bird with olive upperparts, bright yellow underparts all the way to the chin, dark face, yellow &#8220;spectacles&#8221; rather like some vireos, and no wingbars or tail spots; adults have a dark crown. It may suggest certain plumages of other warblers of the genus <I>Oporornis</I> or of Common Yellowthroat, although these should be readily separable with careful attention and a decent view.

The Kentucky Warbler nests east of the Great Plains throughout much of the lower Midwest, the Middle Atlantic states, and the Southeast. Most winter from southern Mexico to Panama, taking a trans-Gulf migration route. This species is relatively less common as a vagrant in the West than most other &#8220;eastern&#8221; warblers. Oregon has four records, all of them between May and July in the south central interior of the state. Washington has only one, on 14 June 1992 near Darrington (Snohomish County), and there are no records for Idaho or British Columbia.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								kentucky_warbler				
303	41	Oporornis	philadelphia	Mourning Warbler		LC		Mourning Warbler is the eastern counterpart of MacGillivray&#8217;s Warbler. The two look almost identical and the songs are also very similar. Both have olive backs, gray hoods (the lower edge is black in the adult male), and the remainder of the underparts bright yellow. The main difference is MacGillivray&#8217;s white crescents above and below the eye, present in all plumages. Mourning has a much weaker broken eye-ring in some plumages, but this is absent in most adult males. Separating these two species in the field, especially in fall, is a perilous exercise. Even experts frequently cannot agree. For this reason state bird records committees in the West reject more reports of Mourning Warbler than they accept. So far only one record has passed scrutiny from the Washington Bird Records Committee: a female seen on 26 May 2001 at Lyons Ferry Park (Franklin County); six other reports have been turned down. Mourning Warbler breeds in northeastern British Columbia and is considered to be a casual visitor elsewhere in the province. Oregon&#8217;s committee has accepted five records. There are none for Idaho.

Mourning Warbler nests across the boreal forest belt of Canada from southeast Yukon to Labrador, south to the Great Lakes states and New England and down the Appalachians to West Virginia; winters from Nicaragua to Ecuador; and migrates through Mexico rather than overflying the Gulf.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								mourning_warbler				
304	41	Oporornis	tolmiei	MacGillivray's Warbler	Fairly common summer resident.	LC	MacGillivray's Warblers are common within their range, but have experienced recent declines. In Washington, the Breeding Bird Survey has reported a significant, statewide decline in population since 1966. Widespread logging in this area has created habitat appropriate for MacGillivray's Warblers, so the information is confusing. It is possible that replanting may adversely affect quality habitat for MacGillivray's Warblers, but more study is needed. Livestock grazing at migration stopover sites and on the wintering grounds degrades habitat and may have a negative impact on the population.	MacGillivray's Warblers are olive above and bright yellow below, with distinctive gray hoods extending to their breasts. Males' hoods are dark charcoal gray, and females' hoods are lighter gray. Both sexes have white crescents above and below their eyes. Males have dark areas in front of their eyes. Immature birds have less distinct hoods and resemble females.		1	MacGillivray's Warblers are found in dense thickets and are a characteristic species of the low, dense undergrowth found in riparian areas and clear-cuts within northern coniferous forests. In western Washington, they are usually in areas that have been clear-cut, burned, or otherwise disturbed. As succession proceeds to the point that trees start to take over from shrubs, MacGillivray's Warblers leave the area. In eastern Washington, they are usually in dense, low vegetation found along streams, especially willow and alder thickets. During winter, they inhabit similar areas in the foothills and mountains of the Neotropics.	MacGillivray's Warblers are found in appropriate habitats on both sides of the Cascades and up into the mountains from late April to mid-August, and to a lesser extent through mid-September. They are found breeding at fairly high elevations, especially in willow or alder thickets. They are rare along the outer coast and avoid developed areas.	MacGillivray's Warblers generally stay in the understory or on the ground, although males sometimes sing from higher perches. They flick their tails from side to side while they forage in the foliage, up the trunk of trees, or on the ground. These shy, secretive birds are often hard to see, but are easily located by their loud vocalizations.	MacGillivray's Warblers eat mostly insects. Immature birds have been observed eating sap from sapsucker holes in trees.	Common in forested landscapes at all elevations in King, Kitsap, and Kittitas Counties. Utilizes open, shrubby habitats such as regenerating clearcuts, forest edge, and avalanche chutes. Absent as breeder in eastside steppe zone and from western lowlands where trees extensively cleared for settlement. Migrants in such areas may linger into mid-June.	Both members of the pair help build a well-concealed nest in dense shrubs, often in an upright fork. The nest is a loose, open cup made of weeds, bark strips, and grass, and lined with rootlets, hair, and other soft material. The female incubates 3 to 5 eggs for 11 to 13 days and broods the young for the first few days after they hatch. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest 8 to 9 days after hatching. The parents continue to feed the young after they fledge, and it is not known how soon the young are fully independent.	MacGillivray's Warbler migration is spread out over an extended period in both the spring and fall, although most leave before fall actually begins (September 21). They are not seen in October at all. They are highly migratory and winter in Central and South America. Much of the population is concentrated in the Rocky Mountains, and their primary route is along those ridgelines, although vagrants are seen throughout North America during migration. They generally migrate at night.	macgillivrays_warbler	MGWA			
305	38	Oreortyx	pictus	Mountain Quail	Rare resident.	LC	Much is not known about the Mountain Quail, which appears to differ in many ways from other North American quail. In Washington they are at the extreme edge of their range.  The populations in the Blue Mountains and near the Columbia River Gorge on the Washington-Oregon border may be native populations, but other Mountain Quail in the state have been introduced. Mountain Quail are the most elusive quail in Washington. They are secretive birds that stay close to dense cover, usually associated with streams.  Once this habitat is degraded, they may be quite isolated and unable to move to more suitable habitat.  Loss of habitat to development, intensive agriculture, and overgrazing is a major threat to Mountain Quail in Washington.  Flooding of riparian areas by dams along the Snake River may have helped wipe them out in southeastern Washington.  Timber harvesting does not appear to affect Mountain Quail populations negatively if the cut site is allowed to regenerate naturally, with brushy species invading shortly after the cut.  In the dry areas of the Mountain Quail's range, such as southeastern Washington, water appears to be a limiting factor. Thus it is important to conserve habitat near reliable water sources.  This habitat should also contain densely vegetated corridors to allow these secretive birds to move under cover.	A chunky, ground-dwelling bird with a short tail, the Mountain Quail is grayish brown in color with bold white bars on its side, rufous under-tail coverts, and a brown throat patch bordered with white.  Males and females appear similar, and both have a long, straight feather plume rising from atop their heads.		1	Mountain Quail are found in dense cover with scattered open areas on slopes in foothills and mountains.  They use the dense thickets resulting from fires or clearcuts, and they are seldom found far from this cover.  Scotch broom thickets provide ideal cover for Mountain Quail, as do alder thickets along streams.  In summer, the quail require a source of water, which may limit their nesting range.	Mountain Quail are uncommon to rare in shrubby vegetation in the southwestern portion of the Kitsap Peninsula (Kitsap County), and toward Elma (Grays Harbor County) into Thurston and Mason Counties.  They have been found on slopes above the Columbia River in Klickitat County (although these populations may by now have been extirpated) and at lower elevations in the Blue Mountains. Formerly, there was a population along the Grande Ronde River (Asotin County), but that population may now be gone.  A population in Walla Walla County appears to have been extirpated as well, as there have been no reports since 1993. Mountain Quail have been introduced in a variety of areas along the Puget Trough, the eastern Cascades, the Wenatchee Mountains, and in southwestern Washington as far east as Vancouver. As birds are regularly released in many areas, distribution is difficult to predict.	Mountain Quail use a variety of foraging techniques. They pick up items from the ground, scratching among the leaf litter, use their feet to dig for bulbs, climb in shrubs and trees to pick berries and leaves, and jump up on low plants to reach berries and seeds.	Diet varies with the season but consists primarily of seeds, bulbs, leaves, berries, and some insects.  Insect and other animal matter are a minor source of food, comprising less than 5% of the diet overall.	Rare to uncommon, and local, in shrubby vegetation (including clearcuts) in mainland Kitsap County, but absent from Bainbridge Island. Introduced and once widespread in western Washington; small remaining population ranges south and southwest from Kitsap Peninsula toward Key Peninsula, Shelton, and Elma.	Mountain Quail nest on the ground in dense cover, usually sheltered by a shrub, log, or clump of grass.  Like other quail, their nests are shallow depressions lined with grass, needles, leaves, and feathers. Females lay 9-10 eggs, which both parents incubate.  Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest.  Both parents tend and actively defend the young, and lead them to food sources, where they feed themselves.	Mountain Quail regularly migrate short distances on foot, usually descending to lower elevations for the winter, staying below the snow line.  They make these treks in groups called 'coveys.' They return in the spring singly or in pairs.  This migration pattern could allow them to exploit higher elevation habitats than other quail, although they are not usually found at very high elevations in Washington.	mountain_quail				
306	33	Oreoscoptes	montanus	Sage Thrasher	Fairly common summer east, casual west.	LC	Range-wide, Sage Thrashers have dramatically declined in many areas and have been extirpated from some.  The species is listed as a species-at-risk by the Gap Analysis Project and Audubon-Washington and is a candidate for endangered-species listing by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.  Much of Washington's sagebrush habitat has been converted to agriculture, and the remaining habitat is becoming increasingly fragmented.  Sage Thrashers are still common in appropriate habitat, and they may be able to tolerate fragmentation better than some species. However, where there is introduced cheatgrass, shrub-steppe becomes unattractive to Sage Thrashers. Thus increased protection of sagebrush is needed to assure that these thrashers remain common.	Sage Thrashers are light-colored, streaked thrashers, with long, strong legs, long tails, and pale eyes.  They have straight bills, which are shorter than those of other thrashers.  Sage Thrashers are slightly smaller than American Robins, with light, gray-brown upperparts with light streaking, and buff-to-white underparts with heavy streaking.  They show white corners on their tails in flight.		1	Sage Thrashers inhabit open, shrub-steppe country.  They appear to prefer areas dominated by sagebrush or bitterbrush, with native grasses intermixed, generally avoiding cheatgrass-dominated landscapes.  After breeding season, they move into thickets, and are often found along creek drainages.	Sage Thrashers are locally common breeding birds in eastern Washington sagebrush habitats from the end of March to mid-August.  They avoid areas dominated by cheatgrass, but are fairly common along Yakima and Umtanum Ridges, on the western half of the Yakima Training Center (Yakima County), and along the Old Vantage Highway between Ellensburg and Vantage (Kittitas County). West of the Cascades, they are casual to rare migrants in spring.	The male Sage Thrasher performs an impressive flight display during the breeding season.  He zigzags swiftly over the sagebrush, and then lands in the brush with his wings held up.  Sage Thrashers spend much of their time on the ground, and, when disturbed, often run with tails cocked up, rather than fly.	During breeding season, Sage Thrashers eat mostly insects, including grasshoppers, tent caterpillars, and beetles.  From late summer into the winter, they eat berries and other wild fruit.	Common in relatively undisturbed big sagebrush and bitterbrush habitats in southeastern Kittitas County. Largely absent from slopes along Columbia River from Vantage north to county line, <i>contra</i> predicted range mapped in Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	Sage Thrashers are monogamous and both sexes help build large, bulky nests, framed with sticks and lined with fine grass and hair.  The nest is usually located in or under big sagebrush or three-tip sage plants.  Sometimes the thrashers construct shade platforms over the nests.  Both parents help incubate 4-5 eggs for about 12 days, and both feed and brood the young for a week or two after they hatch.  The young leave the nest about 10 days after hatching, after which the adults may raise a second brood.	Migration of Sage Thrashers is short-distance, and can be somewhat unpredictable.  Sage Thrashers generally winter in the high deserts of the southwestern US and northern Mexico, but some birds may winter at the southern edge of the breeding range and may concentrate in areas with abundant berries.  They arrive early on the breeding grounds, and depart early as well.	sage_thrasher				
307	60	Otus	flammeolus	Flammulated Owl	Uncommon summer resident east.	LC	Until recently, Flammulated Owls were overlooked in many areas, but they are now believed to be more widespread and common than had been thought.  In general, they inhabit forests that are commercially valuable, which puts them at risk from logging.  The effect of timber management practices on Flammulated Owls is not well understood, although they undoubtedly benefit from the retention of snags and other trees with cavities.  In Washington, Flammulated Owls are absent from many areas that appear to be suitable habitat.  Perhaps the population is not large enough to occupy the entire available habitat, or it may simply be that we do not fully understand their habitat requirements.  Population trends are difficult to determine, as there are no reliable baseline data.  Most of the winter requirements of Flammulated Owls are also unknown.  Flammulated Owls have relatively low reproductive rates, and thus the use of pesticides and any loss of breeding and wintering habitats could have serious impacts on the population.  Flammulated Owls are candidates for inclusion on the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife endangered species list and are considered a species-at-risk by the Washington Gap Analysis and Audubon-Washington.	Flammulated Owls are small owls with short ear-tufts that can be held erect or flush to the head.  Their plumage is of varying dark and light shades of gray, with some mottling and striping of rufous.  They can be distinguished from Western Screech-Owls by their dark eyes - they are the only small forest owls in Washington with dark eyes.		1	During breeding season, Flammulated Owls inhabit mid-elevation, open, coniferous forests.  In Washington, they are generally found in mature Ponderosa pine, Douglas fir, or mixed coniferous forests with a thick understory.  During migration they are at times found at lower elevations in dense thickets, but they are rarely are seen out of their breeding habitat.  Their winter habitat is not well known, but is believed to be similar to their breeding habitat.  They do not winter in Washington State.	Flammulated Owls are uncommon breeders east of the Cascades in the Ponderosa pine belt from late May to August.  There have been occasional records from western Washington, but they are essentially an east side species.  Locations where they may sometimes be found include Blewett Pass (straddling Chelan and Kittitas Counties), Colockum Pass area (Kittitas County), and Satus Pass (Klickitat County.)	Although Flammulated Owls are difficult to see, their low-pitched calls are often heard in the Ponderosa pine belt in late spring and early summer.  These calls sound as if they must come from much larger owls, and many can often be heard calling from one spot.  Flammulated Owls are most active just after dark and just before dawn.	Flammulated Owls mostly eat large insects, especially moths and beetles.  They most often take their prey from foliage, but they also catch prey in mid-air and on the ground.  They only rarely take vertebrate prey.	Uncommon in open conifer stands in lower mixed-conifer forest zones of Kittitas County. Tends to be found in dry forest with low shrub layer and ponderosa pine component. However, local distribution not well understood as suitable-appearing habitat sometimes not used. Probably under-recorded due to somewhat limited nocturnal survey efforts, low-density distribution, and access difficulties. Flammulated Owls do not arrive in Washington until late May and may not reach peak abundance until June due to their dependence on invertebrate prey.	Males arrive on the breeding grounds before females.  They call to establish territories and to attract arriving females.  Birds pair with their mates of the previous year, but if one does not return, they often pair with a bird from a neighboring territory.  The male shows the female potential sites from which she selects the one that will be used, usually an old Pileated Woodpecker or Northern Flicker hole, sometimes an artificial nest box.  Flammulated Owls do not add nest material to the cavity.  The female incubates 2-4 eggs for 20-26 days while the male brings her food.  Once the young hatch, she broods them for about 12 days.  During that time the male brings food for the female and the owlets.  After brooding ends, the female also hunts for the growing brood.  The young leave the nest around after about 25 days but stay nearby.  Sometimes the brood divides, with each parent taking one or two of the young.  Adults and young stay together for another month before the young disperse.	Flammulated Owls can be found in Washington only during their relatively short breeding period.  They are highly migratory, leaving Washington to winter in southern Mexico and Central America.  They migrate at night, moving through the mountains on their way south but through the lowlands in early spring.  This migration route most likely reflects the availability of their insect food.	flammulated_owl				
308	6	Oxyura	jamaicensis	Ruddy Duck	Common winter. Fairly common breeder.	LC	The current population of Ruddy Ducks is apparently much lower than historical levels, mostly due to unrestricted hunting at the beginning of the 20th Century and to loss of nesting habitat. Christmas Bird Count data show a slight decline in Washington.	The Ruddy Duck is Washington's only representative of the stiff-tail ducks, known for holding their spiky tails up in the air. They have large, flat bills, small wings, and feet set far back on the body. The male Ruddy Duck is cinnamon in color overall with a black head, large, white cheek-patch, and bright blue bill. The male in non-breeding plumage has a mottled gray body and gray bill. The markings on the head are similar to those of breeding plumage. The female is mottled gray overall with black on the top of her head and a dark, horizontal line that bisects her white cheek. Her bill is gray.  The juvenile is similar to the female, but the black on its face is less pronounced.		1	In winter, Ruddy Ducks inhabit shallow, protected, saltwater bays and estuaries along the coast or ice-free, inland lakes and ponds. Breeding habitat is freshwater marshes and ponds with marshy borders mixed with open water.	Ruddy Ducks are common in the summer at lower elevations in much of eastern Washington. Ruddy Ducks breed from the central Columbia Basin east through the Palouse and north along major river valleys in all the northern counties of eastern Washington. They are absent as a breeder west of the Columbia River in Chelan and Kittitas Counties as well as throughout most of western Yakima and Klickitat Counties. In western Washington, Ruddy Ducks breed uncommonly in the Puget Trough in King and Pierce Counties. They are abundant throughout the winter on open water. They are most common in the Strait of Juan de Fuca and Puget Sound, at major river estuaries, and locally along the Columbia River.	Ruddy Ducks are often found in tight flocks. They forage by diving under water and straining mud through their bills to find food. Like many small-winged ducks, Ruddy Ducks must get a running start across the water to become airborne.	Seeds and tubers from aquatic vegetation are a main staple of the Ruddy Duck's diet. Aquatic insect larvae are especially favored during the breeding season. Mollusks, crustaceans, and some small fish are also eaten.	Uncommon in lowland King County, mainly in southwest. Apparently absent as breeder from Island and Kitsap Counties. Rare in Kittitas County, with two late-May probable recordsâ??pair on man-made impoundments near Kittitas, and another on West Bar along Columbia River.	Pairs form after the birds have arrived on the breeding grounds. Nests are situated in dense marsh vegetation. The female builds a platform of grasses and cattails, lines it with down, and anchors it to emergent vegetation a few inches above the water. Many nests are concealed by vegetation pulled over the nest, which gives them a basket-shaped appearance. Sometimes the nest is built on top of an old muskrat house or bird's nest. The female lays 5 to 10 eggs (usually 8), and commonly lays eggs in the nests of other Ruddy Ducks or another species. The female incubates the eggs for 22 to 26 days. Within a day after hatching, the young leave the nest and can swim and dive well. They are tended by the female, but feed themselves. They first fly at 42 to 49 days.	Migration is drawn out over a long period in both spring and fall. The spring migration begins in late February, and continues through May. Males undergo a molt migration in July away from the breeding grounds before they head to the wintering grounds. The fall migration lasts from late August to November.	ruddy_duck	RUDU			
309	32	Pagophila	eburnea	Ivory Gull		NT		Ivory Gull is perhaps the most immediately recognizable gull in North America but unfortunately it also one of the least often seen. Small and white-plumaged, it has a black eye, black legs, and a two-toned black-and-yellow bill; immatures have small amounts of black spotting or streaking, including a narrow band on the end of the tail.

The Ivory Gull breeds right around the northern hemisphere but rarely ventures south of the Arctic Circle, nesting on boulder fields and rocky cliffs inland from the frozen sea and wintering mostly on pack ice. It regularly appears in Labrador and Newfoundland in late winter and early spring and is a rare winter visitor to the Maritime Provinces and the northeastern and midwestern United States. It is an exceedingly rare winter visitor in western North America. British Columbia has six records going back more than a century, the most recent of them in December 2001 at Delta, a few miles north of the U.S. border. Washington&#8217;s lone record is from Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) in December 1975. The only record farther south along the Pacific Coast was of a bird found dying in Orange County, California, in January 1996.

The estimated world population of Ivory Gull has been placed at somewhere between 20,000 and 50,000 birds, most of them breeding in the Old World with Canada and Greenland accounting for perhaps 10&#8211;20 percent of the total. However, recent surveys in Canada point to a dramatic decline in numbers. It is thought that by 2003 only about 300 birds remained in the country. Suggested causes for the population crash include global warming, which is rapidly altering the fragile ecology of the high Arctic; high concentrations of mercury in the gull&#8217;s eggs that may be negatively affecting its reproductive success; and disturbances resulting from industrial-scale exploitation of mineral resources within this species&#8217; nesting and foraging territories. Ivory Gull has recently been added to Canada&#8217;s Endangered Species List.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								ivory_gull				
310	39	Pandion	haliaetus	Osprey	Common summer resident.	LC	The Osprey suffered great declines in the past century as a result of DDT and other eggshell-thinning pesticides. Since the ban of DDT in 1972, the Osprey has made, and continues to make, a strong comeback in much of North America. Range expansion into formerly occupied areas has been slow due to their strong philopatry to nesting areas. Artificial nest platforms have significantly increased nesting in many areas. The Breeding Bird Survey has reported a significant increase in the Osprey population in Washington.	The Osprey is a unique bird that is unmistakable when seen at close range. It is the only species in its family, and it is found worldwide. Its breast and belly are mostly white, with some dark streaks. The white extends out the wings, but the primaries, secondaries, and tail feathers are mottled black-and-white. The back is mostly black or dark brown. The head is distinctive with a white crest, a face bisected by a dark eye-stripe, and yellow eyes. While there is much variation, the female tends to have a streakier breast than the male.  The Osprey's talons are uniquely adapted for catching and carrying fish: their surfaces are rough, and their toes can be held with three forward and one back, or with two forward and two back, an arrangement seen in owls but not in other diurnal raptors.  In flight, they are most often confused with gulls because of their long wings, which are bent at the wrist. However Ospreys have a bounce to their flight that gulls lack.		1	Ospreys live near rivers, estuaries, salt marshes, lakes, reservoirs, and other large bodies of water. They are rare along rivers in the shrub-steppe zone, as they prefer water surrounded by forested habitat. They can be found near fresh or salt water, as long as the water can sustain medium-sized fish.	Ospreys are common near large bodies of water at lower elevations throughout Washington. They generally return to Washington in late March or early April; most of the population leaves in August or September. They rarely nest in the Columbia Basin, but are found along the Yakima and Walla Walla Rivers. The greatest abundance of nesting Ospreys in Washington is on the Pend Oreille River, where 22 nests were reportedly visible from a single viewing spot in Usk (Pend Orielle County), and the Everett waterfront.	Ospreys hover over the water, plunging feet first when they spot prey. They fly with slow wing-beats interspersed with glides.  Ospreys form pair bonds through aerial flight displays and courtship feeding.	The vast majority of the Osprey's diet is fish, typically 5-16 inches in size. Only occasionally, when fish aren't available, will the Osprey eat small mammals, birds, or reptiles. However, the Osprey is highly specialized for eating fish and does not stray from this diet unless necessary. When it catches a fish, the Osprey usually flies with it held headfirst.	Fairly common near water throughout, from sea level to moderate elevation. Rarely recorded below ponderosa pine zone except along Columbia River. Most Kittitas County breeders concentrated along Yakima and Teanaway Rivers. Less common at higher elevation, but recorded to Snoqualmie Pass (3,000 feet). Nests on tree stubs and man-made structures such as power poles, usually in full view, resulting in high percentage of confirmed BBA records. Post-DDT population expansion in urban core has continued beyond atlas period, with multiple pairs now nesting in Seattle on cell-phone towers along Duwamish River.	Ospreys build large nests near water, on top of dead trees or artificial structures that are similar to dead trees, such as utility or nesting poles. Nests are made of branches, sticks, and twigs, lined with smaller twigs, grasses, bark, moss, fish bones, and other material. They will reuse nests year after year and continue to add sticks each year, ending up with a huge nest. Nests may be more than seven feet across and over five feet deep. The female typically lays 3 eggs, although clutch sizes between 2 and 4 eggs are normal. Both members of the pair incubate the eggs for 38-43 days. After the young hatch, the female stays with them, and the male brings food. Once the young can be left alone, both parents provide food. The young do not fledge until they are 44-59 days old.	Ospreys are migratory, the majority wintering south of the US border. Most reports of Ospreys wintering in Washington are likely to be misidentifications of sub-adult bald eagles.	osprey	OSPR			
311	41	Parula	americana	Northern Parula		LC		A short-tailed &#8220;eastern&#8221; warbler, the Northern Parula is predominantly bluish-gray with a greenish back, yellow throat and breast, white belly, white wingbars, and white crescents above and below the eye. Adults have a black-and-reddish breast band (more prominent in males). The Northern Parula breeds east of the Great Plains from southern Manitoba and the Gasp&#233; Peninsula south to the Gulf Coast and winters in the West Indies, on the Gulf and Caribbean slope of Mexico, and in Central America.

This species is a regular vagrant in the western United States, particularly in California, which has about 900 records of which about two-thirds have been in spring. Northern Parula is much rarer farther north. Oregon has close to 40 records&#8212;again, mostly in spring. Washington&#8217;s 11 accepted records show a different pattern, with ten of them spread rather evenly from 30 May to 7 September and the eleventh&#8212;the state&#8217;s first&#8212;remaining at Richland (Benton County) from 10 January to 3 February 1975. Nine of the 11 Washington records are from west of the Cascades. Idaho has about a dozen records, although only one has been reviewed and accepted by the state&#8217;s bird records committee. British Columbia has two or three.

<I>Revised August 2007<I/>		1								northern_parula				
312	42	Passer	domesticus	House Sparrow	Common resident.	LC	House Sparrows are one of the most abundant and widespread songbirds in the world. They were originally introduced in this country to control caterpillars. They were first released in New York in 1851, and again in 1852. They were also released in San Francisco in 1871'1872, and in Salt Lake City in 1873'1874. House Sparrows were first noted in Spokane in 1895, made it to Seattle by 1897, and to the coast at La Push by 1916. In urban areas, they inhabit a niche not used by native birds, but in agricultural areas they compete with native birds for limited nesting cavities and may affect local populations.	The familiar House Sparrow is a chunky sparrow with a large head and short tail. It was introduced to this country from Europe and is in a different family from our native sparrows. Males in breeding plumage have streaked chestnut backs, chestnut heads, and gray crowns. They have black throats and breasts and light gray cheeks and underparts. Males in non-breeding plumage look similar, but lack the black throat and breast, have less distinct markings on their heads, and have yellowish rather than black bills. Females have drab, grayish-brown, unstreaked breasts, with mottled buff and brown upperparts and light eye-stripes.		1	House Sparrows are closely tied to areas of human habitation, in either urban or rural settings. They can survive on city sidewalks or in farmlands, but avoid extensive woodlands, native grasslands, and deserts away from human development.	House Sparrows are abundant year round in human-inhabited areas throughout Washington.	House Sparrows form large flocks throughout the state, but tend to gather in larger flocks in the eastern part of Washington. They forage while hopping on the ground, at feeders, or by perching on weed stalks. These sparrows are opportunistic and eat whatever is available. While they are not highly territorial with their own species, they are aggressive toward other species and may drive native birds out of their nests.	House Sparrows are primarily seedeaters but also eat insects, especially during the breeding season. In agricultural areas, waste grain is an important diet component. Urban House Sparrows live off crumbs and rubbish left by humans.	Introduced from Europe. Common in cities, towns, and farmlands at low and moderate elevations throughout four-county area, absent from forested tracts and at higher elevation. Closely dependent on development and agriculture for both food and shelter. Abundant at cattle feedlots and other locales where waste food available, and at bird feeders offering small grains such as millet.	House Sparrows are monogamous and typically breed in cavities. They will use crevices in buildings, nest boxes, or other birds' nests, but if they are in an area with no available cavities, they nest in trees or shrubs, often in small colonies. Both sexes help build the nest, which is a globular nest of twigs, grass, and weeds, often lined with feathers. If the nest is in a cavity, the nesting material generally fills the volume of the cavity. Both parents help incubate 3 to 6 eggs for 10 to 14 days, and both feed the young. The young leave the nest after about two weeks. They stay nearby for 7 to 10 days and then flock with other juvenile birds. The pair raises 2 to 3 broods each year.	House Sparrows are permanent residents throughout North America.	house_sparrow	HOSP			
313	42	Passerculus	sandwichensis	Savannah Sparrow	Common summer resident. Uncommon winter west.	LC	There are two subspecies of Savannah Sparrow in Washington, geographically separated by the Cascades.  Birds return each spring to the area where they were hatched, and this philopatry results in great regional variation within the population.  It is possible that the 17 recognized subspecies will be grouped into three species in the future, but the two Washington subspecies would remain in the same group.  The adaptable Savannah Sparrow is abundant and widespread and has probably benefited from early 20th Century human activity.  However, urban sprawl and reversion of small farms to forests in the northeastern United States may account for population declines seen in this area.  In the western United States, increased intensity of agriculture and continued forest clearing have probably contributed to the increases that continue to be seen in this region.  Breeding Bird Survey results show a small, not statistically significant increase in numbers of Savannah Sparrows in Washington between 1980 and 2002.	The Savannah Sparrow, Washington's most common streak-breasted sparrow of the open country, is highly variable across its range.  The white underside of this sparrow is streaked with buff and brown across the breast.  The back is streaked, and a little bit of rufous is visible on the wings.  The head is brown and gray with a pale yellow eyebrow, which may or may not be visible.  These birds have pinkish legs and bills and relatively short, notched tails.  Western Washington breeders are darkly striped, while birds east of the Cascades and many migrants are paler.  Some of the migrants found in Washington are of a larger-sized race that breeds in the Aleutians.		1	The Savannah Sparrow is found in open habitats ranging from grassy coastal dunes, to farmland, to sub-alpine meadows.  They do not need shrubs for perches, and are absent from pristine shrub-steppe habitat.  They inhabit relatively small patches of grassland, and will even use disturbed and weedy areas in the open.  They are common in grassy areas around towns and at the edges of irrigated fields, especially mint or alfalfa.	Savannah Sparrows are common breeders in grasslands on both sides of the Cascades.  In western Washington, they can be found in the Puget Trough and down the Chehalis River out to the coast.  They are common in agricultural areas and disturbed grasslands throughout eastern Washington.  They can be found breeding in high-elevation meadows in the Cascades, but not the Olympic or Blue Mountains.  In winter, they are uncommon in western Washington from mid-October to mid-March, and a few can usually be found in interior valleys and along the coast.  They are found fairly regularly along the lower Columbia River, but are rare in winter east of the mountains.	Small winter flocks forage on the ground.  Savannah Sparrows walk when foraging, and often run or hop.  They are less shy than many other open-country sparrows, singing from weeds and fence-wires in full view, and also singing from the ground.  The male performs a flight display during the breeding season, flying slowly over the tips of the grass with his tail raised and his feet dangling down.  The song, a distinctive trill preceded by a series of short notes, is distinctive and commonly heard.	Seeds and insects make up the Savannah Sparrow's diet. These sparrows eat proportionally more insects during the breeding season and feed them to the young.  During fall and winter, seeds and berries make up the vast majority of the diet.  Coastal populations also eat some small crustaceans and mollusks.	Common and widespread in western counties at low elevations in grass-dominated habitats such as meadows, farmland, and open coastal areas, but absent in still-forested western Kitsap County. Kittitas County breeders closely linked to open, human-influenced landscapes concentrated at moderate elevation in center of countyâ??especially remnant prairies and irrigated pastures and hayfields of Kittitas and Teanaway Valleys. Records occur peripherally into higher, open areas adjacent to ponderosa pine zone, but movements to higher elevations during post-breeding dispersal obscure situation. Most of predicted range broadly mapped in Kittitas County by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) does not support breeding Savannah Sparrows.	The male sings to defend his territory and attract a mate.  Polygyny is common in many populations, but many are monogamous.  If both members of a pair survive, they are likely to re-pair in the following year.  The female builds the nest on the ground, usually in a depression and well hidden in thick grass or under matted-down plants.  Overhanging vegetation may act as a tunnel, giving the nest a side entrance.  The nest itself is an open cup made of coarse grass and lined with finer grass.  The female incubates the 4 to 5 eggs for 10 to 13 days.  Both parents help brood and feed the young, which leave the nest at 10 to 12 days of age.  The fledglings run short distances, but can't fly well for another week or so.  The parents continue to feed and tend the young until they are about three weeks old.	Most Savannah Sparrows migrate and spend the winter from the southern United States as far south as Central America.  They migrate at night and migration is prolonged, with Washington breeders arriving in mid-March and leaving by mid-October.	savannah_sparrow	SAVS			
314	42	Passerella	iliaca	Fox Sparrow	Common winter west. Common to rare breeder. Rare winter east.	LC	The two breeding subspecies breed in non-overlapping areas.	The Fox Sparrow is a large, chunky sparrow that is highly variable in appearance, depending on geographical region.  It is dark and unstreaked on its back, varying from gray-brown, to dark brown, to rufous.  The tail is typically redder than the back.  The breast is heavily spotted, and the spots are shaped like chevrons that converge in a central spot on the breast.  The head is not striped or streaked, the face is plain, and the lower mandible is yellow.  The combination of the chevron markings, red tail, plain face, and yellow mandible are good field marks to use to identify the Fox Sparrow.		1	Breeding Fox Sparrows can be found at high elevations, especially in wet meadows or in scattered conifers.  Wintering Fox Sparrows inhabit recent clearcuts and tangled brush, especially blackberry thickets.	There are 19 recognized races of Fox Sparrows. These are divided into four groups that may be split into separate species at some point. Fox Sparrows breeding in Washington belong to two groups, and wintering and migrating birds come from a third.  The Sooty Fox Sparrow is an uncommon and local breeder in shrubby habitats along the outer coast, around Cape Flattery, on Tatoosh Island, and on some of the San Juan Islands north of Orcas Island.  These birds migrate down the coast and into western Washington.  Other Sooty Fox Sparrows migrate into Washington from points north.  They can be seen in eastern Washington during migration, and are abundant winter residents in western Washington and north into British Columbia. One race of the Slate-colored Fox Sparrow breeds at higher elevations in the eastern Cascades and northeastern Washington, and another race breeds in the Blue Mountains.  They are locally common in these areas during the breeding season, but leave Washington during the winter.  The Red Fox Sparrow, the northernmost subspecies, has been recorded passing through Washington but only rarely.	Fox Sparrows are not typically found in flocks. Ground-foragers, they scratch in the leaf litter with a two-footed jump-kick motion.	Seeds, especially from grasses and smartweeds (Polygonum spp.), are typical diet items throughout the year.  In the spring and summer, Fox Sparrows eat insects and feed them to their young. Berries, when available, are also a staple.  Birds in coastal areas will eat tiny crustaceans and other small marine creatures found on the beach.	Slate-colored form (subspecies <i>P.i. olivacea</i>) fairly common but local on both sides of Cascade crest, favoring brushy forest edge at elevations above 2,500 feet. Adaptable, nesting from deerbrush-covered openings in ponderosa pine zone up to subalpine parkland. Somewhat nomadic, occupying shrubby regenerating clearcuts until new tree growth becomes too crowded for their liking. Distribution undoubtedly denser than our map shows due to access difficulties for survey teams at remote sites. Record from upper Colockum Creek drainage on 6 June 2000, high on Naneum Ridge, extends range eastward well beyond that predicted by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	The male sings to defend his nesting territory and attract a mate.  The female builds the nest, a bulky cup made of grass, moss, and twigs, lined with hair, fine grass, moss, and feathers.  The nest is located on the ground, in a shrub, or in a tree.  Ground nests are usually on a grassy hummock, hidden under dense shrub cover.  Nests in shrubs or trees are attached to branches and are usually bulkier, with more twigs than their counterparts on the ground.  The female incubates 3 to 4 eggs for 12 to 14 days. Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest at 9 to 11 days. Pairs generally raise two broods per year.	The migration status of the Fox Sparrow is confounded by overlaps between the various groups.  Generally, Fox Sparrows winter in the southern United States, but some groups may winter as far north as coastal Washington. Many of the Fox Sparrows that breed in Washington winter to the south. Some winter in Washington or travel short distances down the coast. Northern coastal breeders from British Columbia and Alaska move into western Washington for the winter. Migration tends to be early in spring and late in fall.	fox_sparrow	FOSP			
315	12	Passerina	amoena	Lazuli Bunting	Fairly common summer east, uncommon west.	LC	Although Lazuli Buntings have increased significantly in Washington since 1966, there is some concern that habitat degradation has allowed Brown-headed Cowbirds to become more prominent in Lazuli Bunting breeding areas, and this may have a negative impact on the population.	Male Lazuli Buntings in breeding plumage are striking, blue birds with rufous breasts.  They have black wings and tails, and white bellies.  They look similar to Western Bluebirds, but are smaller, and have two white wing-bars on each wing.  They also have thicker bills than bluebirds.  First-year males look similar to mature males, but have a brownish wash.  Females look like unstreaked sparrows: they are buffy-brown all over, with two narrow, white wing-bars on each wing.		1	Lazuli Buntings typically inhabit shrubby areas in forested zones.  In Washington, they are often found along dry hillsides, at the lower edge of the ponderosa pine zone, or in streamside thickets, but can also be found occasionally at high elevations.  Recently burned areas, agricultural hedgerows, and residential gardens all may provide shrubby habitats for Lazuli Buntings as well.	Lazuli Buntings are common in eastern Washington in the ponderosa pine zone and along major rivers, from mid-May through September.  They are local and uncommon at higher elevations east and west of the Cascade crest.  The Lazuli Bunting is mostly an eastern Washington bird, but can be found locally west of the Cascades at Fort Lewis (Pierce County), in the Vancouver area (Clark County), along the Skagit and Cowlitz Rivers, and in south King County on the Muckleshoot Prairies around Enumclaw.	When foraging, Lazuli Buntings glean food from the foliage, hop along the ground, or fly out to catch aerial prey.  They also come to bird feeders. Males tend to fly-catch from exposed perches, while females typically fly-catch from lower, more sheltered perches.   Although Lazuli Buntings forage on the ground or in low growth, they sing from prominent perches.  Males are persistent singers, and each develops an individual song as a yearling that it will sing for the rest of its life.  Many males learn their songs by listening to nearby males, resulting in 'song neighborhoods,' where the males in close proximity sing a similar song, but may sound very different from males in a different 'neighborhood.'	Lazuli Buntings eat seeds and invertebrates.  They feed invertebrates to their young, and more than half of their spring and summer diet is insects and other invertebrates.  Weed seeds, waste grain, berries, and millet from bird feeders make up the vegetable portion of their diet.	Common in Kittitas County at openings and edges in lower dry-forest zones, often in shrubby deciduous growth on canyon slopes above streams. Reaches 5,000 feet elevation in Colockum Wildlife Area at eastern end of Wenatchee Mountains in ponderosa pine/shrub-steppe ecotone. West of Cascade crest, locally fairly common only in remnant open, rural landscapes of southwestern King County from Kent to Enumclaw; uncommon in Snoqualmie Valley. Regularly recorded in King County lowlands in spring migration, which continues into June. No breeding evidence from Kitsap or Island Counties.	Monogamous, Lazuli Buntings nest in thick shrubs, vines, or low trees, 2-4 feet off the ground.  The female picks the site and builds the nest, which is an open cup of grass, weeds, bark, and leaves, lined with fine grass, rootlets, and hair.  Tent-caterpillar silk is often wrapped around the outside of the nest.  The female incubates 3-4 eggs for about 12 days, and broods the young when they first hatch.  The male brings food.  The young leave the nest after 9-11 days, but stay close-by in thick undergrowth for several days.  The parents feed the young for at least two weeks after they leave the nest, although the male may take on much of the post-fledging feeding burden if the female starts a second brood.	Lazuli Buntings winter in western Mexico.  They begin to molt after the breeding season. Then they stop molting and travel in flocks to stopover areas (in southern Arizona, New Mexico, and the southern tip of Baja) where they complete their molt, and then continue on to the wintering grounds.	lazuli_bunting	LAZB			
316	12	Passerina	ciris	Painted Bunting		NT		Well-photographed male visiting Seattle feeders in February'March 2002 (King County). Under review by WBRC.		1								painted_bunting				
317	12	Passerina	cyanea	Indigo Bunting		LC		Casual in spring and summer, accidental in fall.		1								indigo_bunting				
318	17	Patagioenas	fasciata	Band-tailed Pigeon	Fairly common west. Rare east.	LC	The Band-tailed Pigeon is fairly common. It is expanding its range and becoming more common as a winter resident in many areas.  After protection from over-hunting, Band-tailed Pigeons made a good comeback from low numbers earlier in the 20th century, although numbers have begun to drop again in recent decades, perhaps once again due to hunting pressure.	Washington's native pigeon, the Band-tailed, is soft gray like the Rock Dove, but longer and sleeker. The largest of Washington's pigeons and doves, it is all gray, with a lighter gray, banded tail.  The bill and feet are yellow, and the eye is black with a thin, red, fleshy eye ring.  Adults have a white collar at the nape of the neck with an iridescent green patch beneath it.  Breasts and bellies are washed in a pinkish-mauve.  Adult males and females look alike; juveniles are an overall gray.		1	Living along much of the Pacific Coast, Band-tailed Pigeons are found in low- and mid-elevation forests. Conifer and mixed coniferous/deciduous habitats are both used, as long as there are some large conifers. Band-tailed Pigeons prefer forest edges--open sites bordered by tall conifers, a habitat type often found in city parks and suburban developments.  In the early breeding season, mineral springs and tidal flats become important.  Towards the end of the breeding season, many birds migrate to higher elevations to feed on ripening fruits	Band-tailed Pigeons are commonly found year round in western Washington lowlands, city parks, and residential areas with large conifers.  They are also found in old growth in the mountains of western Washington or where forests have been opened.  On the Olympic Peninsula, they can be found in small clearcuts with nearby forest patches.  In the southern Cascades, they occur up to the Cascade Crest and, very rarely, over the crest in streamside forests on the eastern slopes.  In winter, birds are often sustained by food provided by humans.  Those that migrate start returning in late February.	Band-tailed Pigeons roost in thick conifers. They are sociable, foraging in flocks most seasons, and nesting in small colonies. Most foraging takes place in trees, in which they climb around with ease, although they also feed on the ground.	Berries, acorns, and other seeds and nuts make up most of the Band-tailed Pigeon's diet.  In June, and again in the late summer, they congregate at mineral springs where they ingest salts. In late summer, they also feed more heavily on fruit.	Fairly common in low- and mid-elevation forested landscapes of Westside counties, including residential areas and city parks with suitable stands of large coniferous trees. Will forage in nearby agricultural areas. Occurs casually up to lower Cascade passes and in wet forests east of crest, but breeding not confirmed there.	Loose colonies with several pairs nesting together are common.  Nests are usually located in trees, 15-40 feet off the ground. Nests are typically placed in a fork on a horizontal branch, or at the base of a branch against the trunk.  The nest is a loose, bulky platform of twigs that the male collects and the female puts in place.  The female lays one or two eggs, and both parents help incubate for 18-20 days.  Both parents feed the young pigeon milk, a protein- and fat-rich liquid produced in their crops.  The young stay in the nest for about 4 weeks and are tended by their parents for some time after leaving the nest.  In warm climates, Band-tailed Pigeons may raise 2-3 broods per year.	Band-tailed Pigeons migrate to take advantage of changing food supplies.  In colder climates many migrate south, but in western Washington they are permanent residents.	band-tailed_pigeon	BTPI			
319	43	Pelecanus	erythrorhynchos	American White Pelican	Fairly common east, rare west.	LC	The American White Pelican is listed as an endangered species in Washington.  Colonies have disappeared from historical breeding areas around Moses Lake.  American White Pelicans are extremely sensitive to human disturbance of breeding colonies.  Disturbance may cause adults to expose eggs and young to predators and temperature stress or to abandon nests altogether.  Habitat destruction has also contributed to population decline.	The American White Pelican is a huge white bird with a nine-foot wingspan.  American White Pelicans have an enormous orange bills and distensible gular (throat) pouches.  Breeding adults have a laterally flattened horn on the upper mandible.  During flight, the American White Pelican's long neck is folded back on its body, and its black primaries and outer secondaries contrast prominently with the rest of the wing.		1	American White Pelicans nest inland on isolated islands in lakes and rivers.  They feed in shallow lakes, rivers, and marshes.  During the winter, they are usually found in warm, coastal marine habitats such as protected bays and estuaries.	American White Pelicans have a very localized distribution in eastern Washington.  They nest on Crescent and Badger Islands in the Columbia River, and at Sprague Lake.  Non-breeding birds can be found locally throughout the Columbia Basin.  Wintering concentrations occur along the Columbia River from the mouth of the Walla Walla River to Priest Rapids and increasingly farther north.	American White Pelicans are highly gregarious and breed in large, dense colonies.  Flocks may forage cooperatively by circling around fish or by driving fish towards the shore where they are easier to catch.  They scoop up prey by dipping their bills in the water.  Food is swallowed for transport, not carried in the pouch. During the breeding season, adults often forage at night. Flocks flying in formation are an impressive sight as they circle downward on set wings from great heights.  Adults are usually silent.	American White Pelicans eat mainly small 'rough' fish with little commercial value.  They also take salamanders and crayfish.		Courtship and pairing occur soon after American White Pelicans arrive at the colony.  Newly formed pairs select nest sites adjacent to other pairs at the same stage of the breeding cycle. Nests are usually located on open, bare soil.  Both sexes build the nest, which consists of a shallow depression surrounded by a low rim of gravel, soil, or plant material. Both sexes incubate the two eggs.  The altricial young are dependent on parents for food and warmth, and the second-hatched chick usually dies.  Older young reach down their parents' throats for regurgitated food.  After leaving the nest, the young gather in groups called 'crèches.'  Parents continue to feed their young until the chicks leave the colony at 10-11 weeks of age.	Most populations of American White Pelicans are migratory; exceptions are birds breeding in Texas and Mexico.  Populations breeding west of the Rocky Mountains typically move south to California and the west coast of Mexico.  Migrants move north in March and south from early September to late November.  Small numbers of non-breeding American White Pelicans remain in eastern Washington throughout the year.	american_white_pelican				
320	43	Pelecanus	occidentalis	Brown Pelican	Common visitor, warmer months on coast.	LC	Brown Pelicans experienced a large-scale population collapse in the 1950s and '60s because of pesticide contamination.  DDT released into the Pacific with agricultural runoff was concentrated in anchovies, causing eggshell thinning in birds that consumed these fish.  Since the banning of DDT in 1972, Brown Pelican numbers have increased dramatically along the Pacific Coast. Now low-flying aircraft are the primary disturbance to roosting birds.	The Brown Pelican is a large bird with a 6½ foot wingspan.  It has an immense bill, and in breeding season its distensible gular (throat) pouch is olive to red.  The body is grayish-brown with a blackish belly.  Non-breeding adults have white heads and necks; breeding adults have dark chestnut hind-necks and a yellow patch at the base of the fore-neck. Immature Brown Pelicans have dark heads.  In flight, the long neck is folded back on the body.		1	The Brown Pelican is a coastal bird that is rarely found away from the sea. The birds on the Pacific Coast nest on islands off the coasts of southern California and Mexico.  After the breeding season, they move north along the coast, frequenting shallow marine areas such as bays, offshore islands, spits, breakwaters, and open sandy beaches.	Brown Pelicans may be found along the outer coast from June to October.  Numbers can be high at the mouth of the Columbia, in Gray's Harbor, at Ocean Shores, and at Copalis National Wildlife Refuge, a collection of coastal islands, rocks, and reefs from Clallam to Grays Harbor County.	While foraging, Brown Pelicans dive from 30 feet or more in the air, plunging headfirst into the water to catch fish.  If successful, they throw their heads back to swallow prey.  Brown Pelicans feed and roost together, and nest in colonies.  Groups of Brown Pelicans may be seen flying low over the waves or in loose formation at greater heights.  Brown Pelicans are generally silent after fledging.	The Brown Pelican's diet consists almost entirely of fish such as smelt and anchovies.  Brown Pelicans also eat some crustaceans and occasionally scavenge or take handouts from fishermen.		Brown Pelicans nest on the ground, on cliffs, or in low trees.  The female builds the nest with material gathered by the male.  The nest is either a simple scrape lined with a few twigs and feathers or a large stick nest in a tree.  The female lays one brood of 2-4 eggs (usually 3) each year.  Both parents incubate.  The altricial young are fed semi-digested fish by both parents.  Young may leave the ground nest after 5 weeks, but young in tree nests remain an additional 2 weeks.  After fledging, the young gather in groups, but the parents recognize and continue to feed their own young.	Brown Pelicans disperse from breeding colonies in late summer and move north along the coast.  Birds begin to arrive on the Washington coast in June, and their numbers peak in September.  The highest numbers in Washington occur during El Niño years, when food is scarce around their breeding colonies in the south and many birds fail to breed. Their numbers gradually decline in October and early November as birds move south for winter.	brown_pelican				
321	46	Perdix	perdix	Gray Partridge	Fairly common resident east.	LC	Gray Partridges were first introduced in North America in the early 1900s. Today their population fluctuates, perhaps due to continued introductions, and, although they are hunted, predation and weather appear to have the greatest impact on their numbers. Conversion of traditional agricultural practices to more intense land-use without shelterbelts and hedgerows has reduced the amount of suitable habitat for the Gray Partridge in Washington. Breeding Bird Survey data indicate that the population has declined since 1966.	A Eurasian species introduced in North America, the Gray Partridge is a chunky bird, measuring approximately 13 inches. It is grayish-brown in color overall and has a gray bill. Both male and female have reddish bars and pale streaks crosshatched along their sides, and chestnut outer tail feathers. The male has an orange face and a dark patch on his belly in contrast to the female, which has a pale face and often lacks the belly patch.		1	Gray Partridges live in flat, agricultural land with shrubby cover for nesting. They use steppe and cultivated areas in the steppe zones and can be found in some Ponderosa pine forests. Gray Partridges benefit from traditional farming practices, which maintain hedgerows and shelterbelts between fields.	Gray Partridges are common throughout eastern Washington in shrub-steppe and dry areas planted with wheat. They are found mostly below the Ponderosa pine zone, but in Spokane and Lincoln Counties, they extend into Ponderosa pine forests. They are rarely found in the hot and arid lower Columbia Basin. Regular introductions make it difficult to predict where they will be, and the range limits are constantly changing.	Most of the year, Gray Partridges are found in small groups, although in the spring they are typically found in pairs or alone. Young remain with their parents through their first winter. 
 They often forage in tall grasses and can be difficult to spot.	Foraging on the ground, Gray Partridges typically eat seeds, waste grain, leaves, and insects. In the fall and winter, their diet of seeds sometimes requires them to burrow into the snow to feed. In the spring they take advantage of green leaves and in the summer, insects. When first hatched, the young eat mainly insects.	Introduced from Eurasia. Fairly common in Kittitas County in shrub-steppe, rangeland, and agricultural fields with shrubby cover nearby for nesting. Center of abundance Kittitas Valley, but also ranges to edges of ponderosa pine zone. Secretive and especially difficult to detect during nesting season, hence BBA records somewhat hit-or-miss and do not capture full distribution. They do suggest, however, that breeding range extends to Columbia Riverâ??considerably farther east than modeled in Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	Gray Partridges produce some of the largest known clutches of any bird, laying between 10-20 eggs per brood. They typically nest on the ground among the dense cover of a hedgerow, shelterbelt, or brushy roadside, although they have been known to nest in the open. While the female builds the nest, a shallow scrape lined with grass and leaves, the male stands guard. The female incubates her large clutch, and both parents tend the hatchlings. Soon after hatching, the young leave the nest, following their parents to food sources and then feeding themselves.	Gray Partridges do not migrate.	gray_partridge				
322	18	Perisoreus	canadensis	Gray Jay	Fairly common resident.	LC	Because Gray Jays live in fairly remote areas, their population status is not well known. They prefer unaltered forest, and populations generally decline after forests have been clear-cut. Caching food for the winter allows these birds to remain at high altitudes and in northern climates year round and allows them to begin their breeding season early.	Gray Jays are medium-sized, gray birds with lighter bellies. There are three populations of Gray Jay in Washington, although the two western populations look quite similar. The population in western Washington and the one in the Cascades both have black from above the eyes to the nape, a white face and forehead, and a white belly. Their gray backs have a brownish cast with fine, white streaks. The Gray Jay in the Blue Mountains and the northeastern corner of Washington has a solid gray back with no brown or streaks, and a black nape. The face, forehead, and neck are white, with a little gray at the top of the head. The belly is gray. Juveniles are dark gray with light gray mustaches. Eastern Washington juveniles have darker caps and lighter throats than western Washington juveniles.		1	Gray Jays are found primarily in mature, humid, sub-alpine, spruce forests. They do not generally breed below 2,000 feet, and are most often found from 3,000 feet and above to the tree line, although some are found nesting locally in lowland habitats.	Gray Jays can be found year round at high altitudes (above 3,000 feet) throughout Washington. They can be found locally down to sea level on the outer coast of the Olympic Peninsula and rarely at other spots in western Washington, such as Lewis and Clark State Park, southeast of Chehalis (Lewis County) and the Willapa Hills (Pacific County). They are very uncommon at Fort Lewis (Pierce County).	Gray Jays are gregarious and are often found in family groups. They can be very bold and will beg from campers, follow hikers, and go inside cabins to steal food. These jays forage from perches and fly from tree to tree, scanning for food. They cache food during the summer and fall, using sticky saliva to paste it in bark crevices and other hidden spots, and they eat this stored food through the winter. Gray Jays often carry food with their feet in flight, which is unusual for songbirds.	Omnivores, Gray Jays eat a varied diet made up of seeds, berries, insects, and other invertebrates, fungi, small rodents, eggs and nestlings of other birds, carrion, and campground handouts.	Fairly common in montane coniferous forests at moderate to high elevation on both Cascade slopes and very locally at lower elevation in Puget Trough. One probable and two possible records for Kitsap County near Green Mountain likely represent coastal race <i>P.c. obscurus.</i> Cascades records likely pertain to <i>P.c. griseus.</i>	Gray Jays are monogamous, and pairs stay together on their territories year round. They begin nesting in late winter; relying on the food they have cached to raise their young. They typically nest in a dense conifer tree, close to the trunk, usually within 15 feet of the ground. Both members of the pair help build the nest, which is a bulky cup of twigs, lichen, bark strips, and caterpillar webbing, lined with hair and feathers. The male brings food to the nest while the female incubates 2 to 5 eggs for about 18 days. The female broods the young for about four days, and then joins the male in feeding the young. The young leave the nest at 22 to 24 days, but stay with their parents for another 4 to 6 weeks. Recent studies have shown there to be a third, unrelated bird on the territory, helping throughout the nesting season.	Gray Jays do not undertake a regular migration, but sometimes move down-slope during winter.	gray_jay				
323	28	Petrochelidon	pyrrhonota	Cliff Swallow	Common summer resident.	LC	By taking advantage of man-made nesting sites, Cliff Swallows have expanded their range considerably, exploiting many new areas. Though they are difficult to survey, the general trend appears to be toward increased numbers and more widespread distribution throughout North America except in the Northeast, where numbers have declined significantly. In general, Cliff Swallows seem to have benefited from development in Washington. They traditionally nested only in the cliffs on the Columbia Plateau, but now are found nesting under bridges and the eaves of buildings. They are extremely tolerant of disturbance and rarely abandon nests for this reason, but their large colonies often carry heavy loads of parasites, and they sometimes abandon sites temporarily when infestations are too great.	The Cliff Swallow is somewhat similar in appearance to the Barn Swallow. The back, wings, and crown of the adult is a deep blue like the Barn Swallow, but the Cliff Swallow has a light belly, chestnut-colored face, dark throat, and pale gray nape. Three field marks especially useful in distinguishing the Cliff Swallow from the Barn Swallow are the white forehead, buff rump, and short, squared-off tail. The Cliff Swallow also has two white streaks down its back. Juveniles are brown above, buff below, and have varying numbers of small white spots on their foreheads and throats.		1	Cliff Swallows originally inhabited open canyons and river valleys with rocky cliffs for nesting.  Many still nest in these habitats, but others have adapted to nesting on man-made structures, especially under bridges and freeways. Cliff Swallows can be seen in farmland, wetlands, prairies, residential areas, road cuts and over open water. They require a source of mud for their nests, and they apparently have specific nesting requirements that are as yet unknown, as their distribution is patchy, and there are many areas that appear to be suitable habitat that host no Cliff Swallows.	Cliff Swallows arrive in Washington from early April on and remain common in the state until early August. They can be found throughout the state in a variety of habitats, mostly in the lowlands. There is a large colony on the Columbia River at Priest Rapids on the cliffs just below the dam. Look for them flying low over the river below the dam early in the morning and in bad weather.	Cliff Swallows forage high in the air, soaring in circles, but they are less agile in flight than other Washington swallows. This is one of the most social land-birds of North America, generally nesting in large colonies (of up to 3,500 nests!) During nesting season Cliff Swallows gather at mud puddles to collect mud that they carry to their nests in their bills. While at these puddles, both males and females flutter their wings up high, which appears to prevent attempts at forced copulation. Extra-pair copulations are common, as is brood parasitism. Females will lay eggs in other females' nests and will also carry eggs in their beaks from their own nests to the nests of others.	Cliff Swallows feed almost entirely on flying insects.	Common breeder represented by two subspecies, <i>H.p. pyrrhonata</i> west of Cascade crest and <i>H.p. hypopolia</i> in Kittitas County. Most records come from low and moderate elevations but a few reach mountain passes. Utilizes natural nest sites such as rocky cliffs along major rivers and coulees on both sides of crest (especially basalt cliffs of Columbia River and Yakima Canyon), but also nests widely on man-made structures including buildings, dams, and bridges. Needs open areas for foraging, hence absent from most forested landscapes.	Cliff Swallows have tidy, well-constructed nests, formed from balls of mud that they collect in their beaks. These nests are built on vertical walls, natural or man-made, frequently with some sort of sheltering overhang. Barns, bridges, and large buildings are regularly used. Birds of both sexes begin by dabbing a circle of mud onto a wall and then adding mud-balls from the bottom of the rim up and out, eventually forming a jug-shaped nest. Unlike Barn Swallows, they do not add sticks or straw to the mud structure, but they do line the nest with grass and feathers. Both members of the pair incubate the four to five eggs for 14 to 16 days. Both feed the young, which leave the nest 21 to 23 days after hatching. The parents continue to feed the young for three to five days after they leave the nest. The young of a colony assemble in large crèches, and Cliff Swallow parents use a sophisticated vocal communication system to locate their own chicks within the crèche.	Cliff Swallows migrate to and from southern South America in large flocks, over a considerable period of time. Most return in early April, appearing at natural nesting sites earlier than they appear at man-made sites. The famous swallows of Capistrano are Cliff Swallows, and, contrary to legend, they return to Capistrano in late February, considerably earlier than the fabled March 19. The date of fall departure varies from year to year, although fall migration typically begins by early August, soon after the young become independent.	cliff_swallow	CLSW			
324	44	Phaethon	aethereus	Red-billed Tropicbird		LC		One bird collected off Westport (Grays Harbor County) in June 1941.		1								red-billed_tropicbird				
325	53	Phainopepla	nitens	Phainopepla		LC		One September record, from Seattle (King County).		1								phainopepla				
326	45	Phalacrocorax	auritus	Double-crested Cormorant	Common resident.	LC	Numbers declined dramatically in the 1960s and 1970s due to contaminants acquired from fish. Since the ban of DDT, populations have been increasing. Double-crested Cormorants are sensitive to human disturbance to colonies, and they are often persecuted as predators of commercial fish at hatcheries. El Niño events reduce the number of breeding pairs as well as the reproductive success of breeders. Although the Washington population along the outer coast increased slightly from 1978 to 1994, it has declined since 1995, most likely because of unfavorable ocean conditions.	Adult Double-crested Cormorants are black or dark brown and have an orange-yellow patch of skin at the base of their bills. In breeding plumage, adults have two whitish tufts behind their eyes, hence the description 'double-crested.' First-year birds are pale on the upper breast and darker on the belly. Double-crested Cormorants have slender, hook-tipped bills that are often tipped up at an angle as they swim. They can be distinguished from the other two Washington cormorant species by their thicker bills and by the pronounced kink in their long necks in flight.		1	Double-crested Cormorants are found on both coastal and inland waters. They often perch on rocks, sandbars, or pilings near fishing sites and forage at ponds, lakes, slow-moving rivers, estuaries, and open coastlines.  Their breeding colonies are typically located on small rocky or sandy islands, or on the exposed tops of offshore rocks. They may also nest or roost in trees, especially when predators are present.	This is the only Washington cormorant likely to be seen in fresh water. Double-crested Cormorants are common year round, both on the coast and on inland waters of western Washington. They nest on islands in Grays Harbor and on rocky islets along the outer coast. Non-breeding birds can be found at lower elevations throughout western Washington. In eastern Washington, they breed at the Potholes Reservoir, Moses Lake, Winchester and Frenchman Hills Wasteways, Crab Creek (all in Grant County), at the McNary National Wildlife Refuge (Walla Walla County), at Usk (on the Pend Oreille River in Pend Oreille County), and at Cow Lake (Adams County).	Gregarious throughout the year, Double-crested Cormorants nest in colonies, form dense nocturnal roosts, and travel in flocks during migration. They forage in shallow water within sight of land. They dive from the water's surface to pursue prey underwater, propelled by powerful, webbed feet. After a bout of foraging, they may be seen on exposed perches with their wings spread, drying their feathers. Males attract females by performing a conspicuous 'wing-waving display' that emphasizes their colorful head-tufts and neck.	Opportunistic feeders, Double-crested Cormorants take a variety of prey species depending on availability. They feed principally on slow-moving or schooling species of fish, and they occasionally consume insects, crustaceans, and amphibians.	Nesting confirmed in four-county BBA only from Smith Island in eastern Strait of Juan de Fuca, although large numbers of birds remain through May at favorite wintering sites such as Lake Washington. Nearest mainland breeding colony at Everett in Snohomish County. Ample appropriate sites present in our area on pilings, spoil islands, and beach cliffs along saltwater shoreline, so nesting may eventually become established as wintering populations continue to increase.	Unpaired males begin advertising for females shortly after choosing a nest site. The male brings nest material to the female, and the female does most of the building. The nest, a platform of sticks and debris, may be found on a rocky cliff near water, on the ground on an island, or in a tree. As the breeding season progresses, nest materials become cemented together by droppings. Both parents incubate the 3 to 4 eggs. The altricial young are fed regurgitated food by both parents. After leaving the nest, the young roam the colony in groups called crèches and return to the nest site to be fed. The young are completely independent of their parents at 10 weeks. Second broods are rare.	Double-crested Cormorants are permanent residents on the coasts and in Puget Sound. Migrants east of the Cascades depart in October and return in March. Some migrants move to the coast from inland areas.	double-crested_cormorant	DCCO			
327	45	Phalacrocorax	pelagicus	Pelagic Cormorant	Common coastal resident.	LC	Cormorants as a group have been killed and harassed by people who believe that the birds damage the commercial fishing industry. (Pelagic Cormorants, however, feed on fish that aren't fished by commercial fisheries.) Oil spills, gill-net entanglement, and toxic contamination of prey also affect the population. In Washington, significant increases in the population were recorded between 1976 and 1992.	The smallest cormorant in Washington, the Pelagic Cormorant is slender, with an especially slender neck and beak. Both males and females are solid black, except during the breeding season when adults have white rump patches that show in flight.		1	Exclusively marine, Pelagic Cormorants can be found in bays and sounds and on the coast (although usually fairly close to shore). They breed on small, offshore islands and rocky cliffs with deep water at the base.	Numerous in northern Puget Sound, Pelagic Cormorants nest on a number of islands throughout the sound. Historically, large colonies have been found on Protection Island in Jefferson County, Smith/Minor Island in Island County, and Jagged Island in Clallam County.	They are generally less social than other species of cormorant.  Feeding is a solitary activity.  Pelagic Cormorants, like other cormorants, catch most of their prey underwater.  Nesting colonies are in hard-to-reach places, as cormorants are more successful at excluding predators than in actively defending against them.	Small fish make up most of the diet, with crustaceans and other marine animals making up a small portion as well. Much of the foraging is close to rocks.	Nests commonly in northern Puget Sound and throughout San Juan Islands on rocky cliffs, but only two confirmed nesting locations for our areaâ??on Smith/Minor Islands and in Bremerton. Latter colony, on Warren Avenue Bridge across Port Washington Narrows, continues to be active despite recent bridge-painting project. Most recent estimate (2003) of 200 nests.	Pelagic Cormorants nest in colonies, which are smaller than those of other cormorants. Colonies are situated on islands, narrow cliff ledges, steep slopes, and other relatively inaccessible locations. The male displays at a nest site by flashing his white patches. Together the male and female construct a nest of seaweed, grass, moss, and occasionally sticks. This nest may be reused from year to year. The female lays a clutch of 3-4 eggs. Both parents incubate and feed the young.	Birds that breed in Washington are permanent residents here, but birds breeding farther north may winter in northern Washington waters.	pelagic_cormorant	PECO			
328	45	Phalacrocorax	penicillatus	Brandt's Cormorant	Fairly common coastal resident.	LC	Local populations fluctuate, but overall numbers are probably stable. Populations are tied to the California current, which is associated with upwelling, deep ocean water, rich in nutrients. Changes in upwellings that occur in El Niño and La Niña years affect food availability for this species. Brandt's Cormorants are also sensitive to disturbance by humans. Such disturbance, plus commercial fishing and pollution, are all factors that keep the Brandt's Cormorant at risk.	Brandt's Cormorants are large and have long, slender necks. Adults are almost solid black. Juveniles are buff-brown and black. Birds of all ages and phases have light-colored cheek patches. During the breeding season, adults have a blue patch at the base of the bill, in front of the cheek patch. Brandt's Cormorants have a shorter tail than any of the other cormorants found in Washington.		1	Almost always found on salt or brackish water, Brandt's Cormorants inhabit rocky shorelines and open ocean. Nesting colonies are typically located on slopes rather than cliff ledges, although some Washington colonies are located on steep cliffs.	Brandt's Cormorants are common along the rocky outer coast and coastal islands of Washington, from Cape Flattery to Oregon. They are rarely seen in Puget Sound or other inland waters during the breeding season, but are common, especially in the upper Puget Trough and Strait of Juan de Fuca at other times of the year. In 1992, the largest colony in the state was at Willoughby Rock in Grays Harbor County, with 446 nests. Brandt's Cormorants also nest at Fort Canby State Park in Pacific County.	Sociable in all seasons, Brandt's Cormorants are often seen flying in long lines, low over the water. They roost together and feed in offshore flocks, often mixed with other seabirds. They are sometimes even seen foraging in association with sea lions. They catch most of their food under water, diving up to 150 feet.	A wide variety of fish make up the Brandt's Cormorant's diet. Some shrimp and crabs are also taken. These cormorants forage under water at all levels, although most foraging takes place near the bottom.		Brandt's Cormorants, like other cormorants, are colonial nesters. The male Brandt's Cormorant chooses the nest site and attracts the female to it. Once paired, they build a nest on the ground of seaweed, eelgrass, and algae, held together by droppings. The male gathers the nest material from the water, and the female builds the nest. Pairs may reuse the nest, adding more material to it each year. Both the male and female incubate the four eggs, and both regurgitate food for the young.	Brandt's Cormorants are mostly permanent residents, with some local movement.	brandts_cormorant	BRAC			
329	45	Phalacrocorax	urile	Red-faced Cormorant		LC		One bird seen at mouth of Elwha River in May 1999.		1								red-faced_cormorant				
330	11	Phalaenoptilus	nuttallii	Common Poorwill	Fairly common summer resident east.	LC	This cryptic species is very difficult to survey accurately, although recent studies show it to be more abundant in many places than was previously thought.  It is widespread, and numbers are probably stable, although more study is needed to get a better sense of the population status.	The highly cryptic Common Poorwill is heard far more often than it is seen.  It is smaller than a nighthawk, with a shorter tail. Common Poorwills are mottled gray and brown with a white band across the chest and a pale collar around the neck. The upperparts vary from dark brown to light gray.  Most, if not all, of the Common Poorwills in Washington are dark. Like other members of the family, Common Poorwills have large heads, short necks, and little difference between males and females.		1	Common Poorwills typically inhabit dry, open areas, including desert, grasslands, and open forests. They require a combination of rocky ledges or canyons and open, shrubby areas.	Common Poorwills are very difficult to see but are common in canyons and shrubby areas at the ecotone where the Ponderosa pine forests and shrub-steppe habitats meet in eastern Washington from late April through August. They can also be found in mountainous sagebrush habitat and in the Columbia Basin. Migrants have been recorded in western Washington as well but are extremely rare.	These nocturnal birds hunt from the ground, looking up into the sky and flying up to grab prey.  They often hunt from roadsides and can be spotted when their eyes reflect in car headlights.  The Common Poorwill was the first bird discovered to hibernate, or go into torpor.  The birds' temperature can drop to as low as 41 degrees, and their rate of respiration is reduced up to 90%.  They can remain in this state for days or weeks at a time.  When vocalizing, Common Poorwills give repeated calls that sound like, 'Poor Will,' followed by a weak, lower, third note. The calls are almost always made from the ground.	Common Poorwills eat mostly flying insects, especially moths and beetles.	Fairly common in canyons and open shrubby areas with rocky outcroppings in eastern Kittitas County. Nests on ground. Most prevalent on slopes above stream bottoms at or below forest/shrub-steppe edge, but also found locally in dry, open forest of higher mountains. Distribution of this nocturnal species imperfectly captured by BBA surveys, most of which took place in daylight hours. Deficiency of nighttime surveys particularly evident for Yakima Training Center.	The male calls from the ground or a low perch to attract a female.  Both parents incubate two eggs, which are laid on bare ground. No nest is built, but sometimes a slight scrape is present. The eggs are often placed in the shelter of a shrub or rock.  If disturbed, the eggs (or young) will be moved. Incubation lasts for 20 to 21 days. Once the eggs have hatched, both parents brood and feed the young regurgitated insects.  The young begin to fly at 20 to 23 days. Pairs often raise two broods a year. It is not uncommon for the female to be incubating the second clutch while the male is still tending the first.	Common Poorwills leave in late August or early September and migrate to Mexico. They return in April.	common_poorwill				
331	57	Phalaropus	fulicarius	Red Phalarope	Pelagic migrant and winter. Casual inshore.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the global population of Red Phalaropes at 1,000,000 birds. This species is abundant on its breeding grounds, but is threatened by oil spills at sea and potential development of its breeding habitat.	Female Red Phalaropes in breeding plumage have deep rufous necks, breasts, and bellies, and brown and black mottled backs. Their heads are black with white cheeks, and their bills are yellow.  Males in breeding plumage look similar, but are duller, with a brown rather than a black cap.  The adult in non-breeding plumage looks similar to a Red-necked Phalarope in non-breeding plumage, with white below and light gray above, a white head, and a black ear patch behind the eye.  The Red-necked Phalarope's back is streaky gray, however, and the Red Phalarope's back is unstreaked.  Juveniles have buff-colored underparts and heads. Their backs are black, edged in buff.  The Red Phalarope's bill is much thicker than those of the other two species.  The bill is yellow in breeding plumage, and dark with a lighter base in non-breeding plumage.  The Red Phalarope has short legs and lobed toes.  All adult plumages show a distinct white stripe down the wing and a dark stripe down the tail, with contrasting color on the sides of the rump.  This species is also called the Gray Phalarope.		1	The Red Phalarope spends more time at sea than any of the other phalaropes. It nests in the low, wet tundra of the high Arctic coasts. Outside of breeding season, it is usually at sea, wintering in the waters off western South America and Africa, but also as far north as western North America.  It is rarely found on fresh water, but when it is, these are typically small bodies of water, such as sewage ponds.  Red Phalaropes usually occur farther offshore than Red-neckeds, but there may be an overlap.  They can often be found in areas with upwellings or convergence zones that bring food to the surface.	A pelagic boat trip, especially during migration, is the best way to see Red Phalaropes.  Red Phalaropes are the least common of the two ocean-going phalaropes, seen about half as often on boat trips as Red-necked Phalaropes. They can sometimes be seen from the coast, or even on shore in puddles and ponds, after a storm. They are late migrants, and commonly stay in the waters off Washington until December.  Juveniles are very rarely reported in eastern Washington in the fall.  Offshore, they can be seen in any month of the year, but are rare for much of that time.  Spring migrants start coming through in the beginning of May, and are common by the second half of May.  The spring migration is condensed, and birds are uncommon by the beginning of June. They become common again in mid-July, as adults start migrating south, and they remain common into mid-November, as the young of the year follow the adults. They are still present, but uncommon, until the end of November, after which they become rare again until spring.	Red Phalaropes are usually in smaller flocks than Red-necked Phalaropes, but are sometimes in mixed flocks with them. They are often found with whales, and will pick parasites from their backs. These active birds generally feed by picking food from the water's surface, but will also strain plankton through their bills.  When swimming, they occasionally spin in tight circles and create upwellings of food.  They may land on seaweed mats at sea. When they are driven ashore by storms, they forage by walking slowly along the water's edge.	On their breeding grounds, Red Phalaropes eat a variety of invertebrates, especially insects, mollusks, and crustaceans. Their winter diet on the ocean is not well known, but includes small aquatic creatures.		The female attracts a male with a display flight.  Both sexes start scrapes, and the female picks one. The male adds a lining of grass, lichen, and moss to the shallow depression concealed in low vegetation near the water.  After laying four eggs, the female leaves the male to provide all parental care.  He incubates the eggs for 18-20 days and tends the brood once they hatch. The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and find their own food.  The male may leave the young within a few days, or may stay with them until they can fly, at 16-18 days.	Red Phalaropes don't stage at interior lakes as do the other two phalaropes. They head for the ocean as soon as they have finished breeding.  Most of the migration occurs offshore as well.	red_phalarope				
332	57	Phalaropus	lobatus	Red-necked Phalarope	Common migrant, mostly pelagic.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the global population of Red-necked Phalaropes at 4,000,000 birds, with 2,500,000 in North America. The remainder breed throughout the far Northern Hemisphere. While the population is difficult to monitor, there has been some evidence of declines in some areas, and Red-necked Phalaropes have disappeared from some traditional staging areas in recent years. Very little is known about the status of their wintering areas or what effect El Niño events have on the population.  More study is necessary to understand the status of the population and its conservation needs.	The Red-necked Phalarope (formerly the Northern Phalarope) is the smallest of the three phalaropes and has the shortest bill.  It has black legs and lobed toes. The adult female in breeding plumage is dark with a gray breast and dark gray back with brown stripes.  Her head and cheeks are dark, and her neck is deep rufous, with a white throat patch and small white spot above the eye.  The male looks similar but is not as brightly colored and has more white over his eye, making an eye-line rather than a spot.  The non-breeding adult Red-necked Phalarope and Red Phalarope appear similar.  Both are gray above and white below, with a white head and face and dark ear-patch. However, the Red-necked Phalarope's back is streaked gray, and the Red Phalarope's back is unstreaked.  The juvenile Red-necked Phalarope is buff and black streaked, but it has molted out of that plumage by the time it moves through Washington.  In flight, all plumages show a white stripe down the middle of their wings. The Red-necked Phalarope has a dark center stripe down its tail, with lighter sides. From below, it appears mostly white, but with more dark edging on its wings than the Red Phalarope.		1	Red-necked Phalaropes spend up to nine months at a time at sea.  They nest in the low Arctic, on tundra ponds with marshy shores and bogs.  They usually breed farther inland and at higher elevations than do Red Phalaropes, which prefer coastal breeding areas.  During migration, large numbers gather at hyper-saline lakes before heading south. Many migrate over the open ocean, often within sight of land. Some migrate over land and can be seen on reservoirs, lakes, and coastal marshes.  At sea, they gather at upwellings and convergence zones where food is brought to the surface.  They are sometimes blown onshore by storms and during these times can be found anywhere, especially at sewage ponds.	Red-necked Phalaropes are common offshore migrants which at times can also be seen from the coast.  Northbound Red-necked Phalaropes are most easily seen during offshore boat trips, especially where two ocean currents converge.  Offshore and along the coast, Red-necked Phalaropes begin to arrive in April and become more common during May, but moving through quickly, they are seen only rarely in June. Offshore and along the coast, returning migrants can be found in good numbers from early July through mid-Sepember or October in some years.  Numbers then taper off until the end of the migration in late November.
In the inland Spring migration, Red-necked Phalaropes begin to appear in small numbers in mid-April, inrease to uncommon status in May, and are again seen only rarely in early June. After a gap of several weeks, southbound migrants appear, increasing from early July, peaking in August through early September, and decreasing again through late September and October.	Outside of the breeding season, Red-necked Phalaropes are highly social and are often found in flocks. These active birds pick small bits of food from the water's surface.  When swimming in shallow water, they will spin in tight circles and create upwellings of food.	During the breeding season and when on fresh water, they eat mostly insects. At saline lakes, they consume brine shrimp in large numbers. When at sea, they eat zooplankton and other small creatures that rise to the surface at convergence zones.		Females arrive on the breeding grounds before males. They establish territories and display to attract mates. Both sexes start scrapes on mounds or tussocks near the water, and the female picks one. The male adds a lining of grass, sedge, lichen, and leaves in a shallow depression concealed in sedge, ferns, grass, or shrubs.  After laying four eggs, the female leaves the male to incubate the eggs and provide all parental care. The female often tries to attract another mate.  The male incubates the eggs for 17 to 21 days and tends the brood once they hatch. The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and find their own food.  The male leaves the young after about two weeks.  The young start to fly at 16 to 17 days, and can fly well by 20 to 22 days.	These migrants travel long distances from their Arctic breeding grounds to winter in tropical seas around the globe. They migrate over land and over the ocean, and gather in the fall at saline lakes in the North American west before heading to their wintering grounds.	red-necked_phalarope				
333	57	Phalaropus	tricolor	Wilson's Phalarope	Fairly common summer east. Rare west.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population of Wilson's Phalaropes at 1,500,000 birds. They are listed on the Audubon~Washington watch list as a species-at-risk. Much of their prairie breeding habitat has been lost due to the destruction and draining of marshes. Concentrating in a few major staging areas during migration also puts them at risk. They do shift and adapt their breeding range to take advantage of new habitat. While they no longer breed in some areas (Nisqually National Wildlife Refuge in Pierce County is one example), they have expanded into many new areas across the West. This adaptability will help the Wilson's Phalarope fit into the changing landscape. These birds do not seem to be as flexible about staging areas, and the protection of these lakes is important to maintain the species at its current numbers.	Of the three phalaropes in Washington, the Wilson's Phalarope has the longest bill and legs. The female in breeding plumage has a gray back with chestnut and black on the wings. She has a bold, black stripe running from her bill across her eye and down the side of her neck. Her head is gray above the dark stripe and white below. The front of her neck is salmon-colored. Her rump and undersides are solid white. Males vary in brightness, but are gray above and white below, with a white throat and face. The back of the male's neck is brownish, and his face is white, bisected by a dark eye-line. In breeding plumage, adults of both sexes have black legs. During the non-breeding season, both sexes look similar--gray above and white below, with yellow legs. Their faces are white, and their throats are gray. In flight, they are solid white below. Their wings are solid gray, with no white stripe. They have white rumps and light gray tails. Juveniles look similar but are mottled gray-brown above. They keep this plumage for a very short period of time, so juvenile plumage is not often observed in Washington.		1	Wilson's Phalaropes are found mostly on fresh water, but during migration they can also be found in small numbers on salt water. They breed in shallow, prairie wetlands in the northern US and southern Canada. During migration, they inhabit shallow ponds, flooded fields, and sometimes mudflats. Wilson's Phalaropes winter on large, shallow ponds and saline lakes in southern South America.	Wilson's Phalaropes are most easily found in eastern Washington, where they are fairly common breeders in appropriate habitat--mostly east of the Columbia and Okanogan Rivers, especially in the Potholes area (Grant County) and the Okanogan Valley (Okanogan County). Breeding Wilson's phalaropes have also been found in some years in the Ridgefield and Nisqually National Wildlife Refuges and in the Everett area.

Wilson's Phalaropes are rare visitors to Washington's coast from late April to early October. These migrants are seen more commonly in western Washington in spring than in fall.  In eastern Washington, a few start to arrive in early April, and numbers build throughout the month. By late April, they are common. They stay through July, but numbers drop in August, and they are rare by September when the last migrants leave for the winter.	These active birds pick small bits of food from the water's surface. When swimming, they spin in tight circles and create upwellings of food, although Wilson's Phalaropes do this less than the other two phalaropes. In comparison to Red and Red-necked Phalaropes, Wilson's Phalaropes forage more often in shallow water or on shore. They regularly occur with American Avocets and Black-necked Stilts, but they forage in denser habitat and run about more actively than other shoreline-foragers.	Wilson's Phalaropes eat aquatic insects and small crustaceans. When they are on saline lakes, they eat brine shrimp and brine flies.	No confirmed nesting records in our four-county area, although pairs have been noted in early June on three atlas blocks near Cle Elum and Ellensburg in Kittitas County. Single birds also noted at Auburn and Carnation in King County. Core habitat includes freshwater ponds and wetlands in non-forested lowlands and montane valleys. Wilson's Phalarope has nested at Nisqually National Wildlife Refuge (Paulson 1993), although perhaps an isolated event. Often nests at specific sites sporadically.	Females arrive on the breeding grounds before males. When the males arrive, the females compete for mates. Some females attract multiple males, but monogamy is more common. The male builds the nest, which is a scrape lined with grass, concealed in dense, tall grass or sedge near the water. After laying four eggs, the female leaves the male to provide all parental care. He incubates the eggs for around 23 days and tends the brood after they hatch. The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and find their own food.	Female Wilson's Phalaropes leave the breeding grounds after they finish laying eggs. Males follow as soon as the young are independent. They migrate to staging areas on large western lakes (Summer Lake and Malheur Lake in Oregon, and Mono Lake in California) where they molt before their long journey to South America.	wilsons_phalarope				
334	57	Phasianus	colchicus	Ring-necked Pheasant	Fairly common resident.	LC	The first successful introduction of Ring-necked Pheasants into the Pacific Northwest took place in the Willamette Valley of Oregon in 1881. Two years later, the first pheasants were introduced in Washington, in the southeastern portion of the state. The conversion of shrub-steppe habitat to agriculture originally benefited pheasants, but the farming practices used since the 1980's include harvesting during the nesting season and the removal of cover that the birds require. Ring-necked Pheasants are the most popular upland game bird in Washington, and there is a statewide program to maintain the population. Habitat protection and enhancement are the long-term goals of the program in Washington, but in the short term, the program releases large numbers of pen-raised birds on public lands to supplement the limits placed by climate and habitat. The Breeding Bird Survey shows a small, not statistically significant decrease in population between 1980 and 2002.	The Ring-necked Pheasant is a large, dramatic bird, approaching nearly 3 feet, with a long, pointed tail. It was introduced from Eurasia for game hunting. The female pheasant is drab and mottled brown. The male is more boldly colored with a darker, mottled body, a white collar, or ring, around his neck, and an iridescent blue-green head with a bold red patch around the eye. The population in North America has many different subspecies, so variation in coloring is common.		1	Ring-necked Pheasants are found along edges of open fields, brushy hedgerows, and forest edges. They thrive in the vast tracts of wheat fields in eastern Washington. They often inhabit marshy areas and are rarely found in dry areas. Prime habitat in Washington appears to be cattail and willow patches near irrigated farmlands.	Ring-necked Pheasants are common in open areas at low elevations throughout the state. Releases take place in Yakima, Grant, Adams, Franklin, Walla Walla, Whitman, Asotin, Garfield, Columbia, and Benton counties east of the Cascades, and in Mason, Pacific, Pierce, Skagit, Snohomish, Thurston, and Whatcom counties west of the Cascades. Contact the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for release sites.	In the winter, Ring-necked Pheasants often appear in segregated flocks, males in small groups and females in larger groups. Typically feeding on the ground, they uncover food by scratching with their feet or digging with their bills.	Ring-necked Pheasants are omnivores with diet varying by season. In winter, they eat mostly seeds, grains, roots, and berries, while in the summer they take advantage of insects, fresh green shoots, spiders, earthworms, and snails. Breeding hens and young chicks eat a greater proportion of animal matter than the rest of the population. While laying eggs, females eat large quantities of high-calcium snail shells.	Introduced from Old World. Birds regularly released for hunting may help sustain wild populations in some areas. Fairly common in open habitats at low elevations in Kittitas and Kitsap Counties; uncommon to fairly common but very local in similar habitats in King and Island Counties. Found chiefly in grasslands, agricultural fields, shrubby or weedy wastelands, shrub-steppe, semi-rural residential areas, large city parks. Range as mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) extends farther north and west in Kittitas County than supported by BBA data.	The male defends a territory that may house a small harem of females who nest on the ground in the dense cover of alfalfa, wheat, or hay. Females build their nests in a shallow depression in the ground, lining them with grass, leaves, and weeds. Females incubate 10-12 eggs, and the young leave the nest and feed themselves shortly after they hatch.	Permanent resident. Ring-necked Pheasants in good habitat may spend their entire life in an area less than 700 acres in size.	ring-necked_pheasant	RNEP			
335	12	Pheucticus	ludovicianus	Rose-breasted Grosbeak		LC		Casual statewide in spring and summer (April-July)'occurs almost annually. Accidental both east and west in fall and winter (September-January).		1								rose-breasted_grosbeak	RBGR			
336	12	Pheucticus	melanocephalus	Black-headed Grosbeak	Common summer resident.	LC	According to the Breeding Bird Survey, the population of Black-headed Grosbeaks in Washington has increased significantly since 1966.  They benefit from some human activity on the breeding grounds.  Suburban development and logging generally increase the amount of broadleaved vegetation in the coniferous-dominated Pacific Northwest, and the increasing numbers of orchards in eastern Washington has provided more habitat as well.  Development creates habitat to some extent, but increasing urbanization reduces available habitat. Black-headed Grosbeaks are not found in typical suburbs, but in more outlying areas that are still semi-rural. These birds need a certain density of big deciduous trees.	Black-headed Grosbeaks are medium-sized songbirds with short, thick bills.  The male is striking, with a black head, rusty-orange breast, nape, and rump, black back, wings, and tail, and white patches on its wings.  The under-wing linings are yellow, and the outer tail feathers are white; both of these can be seen in flight.  The female is drab and streaked, but also has yellow under-wing linings.  She has a dark crown, a white line above the eye and below the cheek, and two white wing-bars on each wing.  First-year males are streaked like females but have more orangey underparts.		1	Black-headed Grosbeaks are typically found in broadleaved or mixed forests, and especially in brushy, riparian areas.  They are generally not found in coniferous vegetation, but will inhabit patches of broadleaved trees and shrubs within conifer forests, including streamside corridors, wetlands, and suburban areas.	Black-headed Grosbeaks can be seen in appropriate habitats at lower elevations throughout Washington from mid-May to mid-August, and sometimes into mid-September.  They can be quite common in Garry oak stands in Klickitat County and in streamside forests in the eastern Washington shrub-steppe zone.	Black-headed Grosbeaks sing their robin-like song from conspicuous perches, and forage in the foliage.  They also forage on the ground or in low vegetation.  During courtship, males fly with their wings and tails spread.  Both sexes sing, but have different songs.	On the wintering grounds, Black-headed Grosbeaks eat many seeds.  During summer, they eat insects, spiders, snails, and berries.  The Black-headed Grosbeak is one of the few birds than can eat monarch butterflies, despite the noxious chemicals that the monarchs accumulate from their milkweed diet. Black-headed Grosbeaks eat many monarchs on their wintering grounds.	Common throughout at lower and middle elevations in hardwood or mixed forests and along riparian corridors, with a few records extending to Cascade passes. Avoids dense, moist forest at higher elevations, but common in riparian growth in lower, dry-forest zones of Kittitas County. Absent in extensive shrub-steppe landscapes. Black-headed Grosbeak has probably benefited in western counties from logging that has converted conifer forests to secondary hardwood forests. Most records from urban core probably represent migrants.	Black-headed Grosbeaks are monogamous, but pair bonds last for only one breeding season.  The female builds the nest on an outer branch of a small willow, alder, big-leafed maple, cottonwood, or other broadleaved tree or shrub.  The nest is a bulky, open cup made of twigs, weeds, rootlets, and needles, lined with rootlets, hair, and fine plant material.  Both sexes help incubate 2-5 eggs for 12-14 days.  They both brood the young for about a week, and both bring food to the nest.  The young leave the nest at 10-14 days but can't fly for another two weeks.  The adults continue to feed the young until after they can fly, and raise only one brood a year.	Black-headed Grosbeaks are highly migratory and winter in Mexico.  After the breeding season, they wander into berry-rich areas and may form migrating flocks at this time.  They migrate early in the fall and return late in the spring.	black-headed_grosbeak	BHGR			
337	57	Philomachus	pugnax	Ruff	Rare fall migrant.	LC	Loss of wetland habitat has contributed to a decline in the population in some parts of Europe. Here in Washington, the Ruff is one of the most numerous Siberian shorebirds seen on our coast.  Its range may have expanded into North America, as there is evidence of a small breeding population of a few dozen birds in Alaska.	Male Ruffs are highly distinctive in breeding plumage, although that is not generally the plumage that we see when this Eurasian shorebird visits Washington.  The adult male varies in color from dark rufous to light brown with considerable white. It has a thick mane of long feathers around its neck and thick head-feathers that can be puffed out.  The female, called a Reeve, is mottled brown-and-buff with orange legs (sometimes olive or green).  Females and males in non-breeding plumage appear similar, and both have orange bills with white feathers at the bases.  The female is about the size of a dowitcher, and the male is similar in size to a Greater Yellowlegs.  The juvenile, the form most likely to be seen in Washington, has lighter, more yellow legs than adults. Its breast is clear buff, and its belly grades from buff to white. The head is buff and mostly unstreaked, and the back is black edged with buff.  In flight, the Ruff shows a white 'U' on its tail, separating a dark rump and dark tail-tip.		1	Ruffs breed in sub-Arctic and Arctic tundra meadows in northern Europe and Siberia.  They winter primarily in similar open, wetland habitats in southern Europe and Africa, and to a lesser degree in southern Asia and Australia.  During migration, they can be found in these habitats as well as coastal ponds, lagoons, estuaries, and mudflats.  These coastal wetlands are the Washington habitats where Ruffs are most likely to be spotted.	In Washington, these rare but regular visitors are generally found singly or occasionally in pairs.  Most of the birds spotted in Washington are juveniles, and they are most likely to be seen in August and September.  Over half of the Ruff records in Washington are from Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County). Ruffs have also been spotted in Aberdeen (Grays Harbor County) and Reardan (Lincoln County). There are a few spring records from the Vancouver, BC area, and one spring record from St. Andrews, WA (Douglas County).	In fresh water, Ruffs are often seen wading up to their bellies, but in salt water they usually stay above the shoreline, in habitat similar to that used by Pectoral Sandpipers.  They walk or run at a steady pace, with their heads up, picking food from the substrate. They also sometimes probe in the mud and walk slowly through vegetation with their heads down.	Ruffs eat a typical shorebird diet of insects and other invertebrates. During migration and winter, they may also eat seeds.		Male Ruffs gather into groups in concentrated areas called leks, to display and attract females. The female comes to a lek and chooses a male. The female mates with a male and then leaves the lek. As is typical in this type of mating, the male provides no parental care. The female builds her nest on the ground, hidden in grass or marsh vegetation.  The nest is a shallow depression lined with grass. She lays four eggs and incubates them for 20 to 23 days.  The female feeds the newly hatched young, which is unusual for this group.  The young first begin to fly at 25 to 28 days.	Ruffs, Eurasian shorebirds, are long-distance migrants. They typically breed from northern Europe to Siberia and winter in southern Europe and Africa, but they regularly wander off-course from their migration routes and appear on both coasts of North America, especially during the fall.	ruff				
338	20	Phoebastria	albatrus	Short-tailed Albatross	Accidental pelagic.	VU	At the beginning of the 20th Century, the Short-tailed Albatross was fairly common throughout the north Pacific. Remains found in excavations of Native American dwelling sites corroborate reports by early naturalists that this species was more common near shores than were other albatrosses. Their historic population is estimated at over a million birds. On their nesting islands, they were aggressively hunted for food, oil, eggs, feathers, and feet, and in one 17-year period, over 5 million were killed. By 1933, when all forms of Short-tailed Albatross hunting were banned, and the bans were finally enforced, the population was only 3-50 birds.  They were considered extinct in the 1940s. In the 1950s, a few young pairs that had been at sea for a several years returned to Torishima Island and began to breed there. Since then, numbers have gradually increased, but a bird that is so late to breed and lays only one egg per year is slow to rebound. Currently there are an estimated 1200 birds worldwide, with 600 of breeding age. The largest colony is on Toroshima Island, an active volcano that could easily wipe out the population once again. There are no breeding populations in the United States, but several individuals have been seen regularly during the breeding season on Midway Atoll in the northwestern Hawaiian Islands. The small population size and limited breeding distribution have left the Short-tailed Albatross genetically vulnerable. It is listed as endangered by the United States Department of Fish and Wildlife, and is a candidate for listing by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.	With a wingspan that can reach 13 feet and weighing up to 25 pounds, the Short-tailed Albatross is the largest albatross in the north Pacific. Its beak is very large and pink, and its feet are yellow. Juveniles are solid brown for their first several years. The sub-adult has a white back and rump,   black tail and wingtips, and yellow head with a dark band at the nape of the neck. In adult plumage there is no dark band. The bird does not reach full adult plumage until 12 to 20 years of age.		1	Short-tailed Albatrosses nest on islands off Japan and spend most of their lives at sea.	The Short-tailed Albatross is an extremely rare bird off Washington's coastline. Between 1940 and 1990, there were only a few valid records of the Short-tailed Albatross on the West Coast south of Alaska, most between April and August. Since the early 1990s, sightings have increased, and a few birds are reported annually off the West Coast.  As this bird continues its slow recovery, sightings may again become more common in this area, but this species has a long recovery ahead of it.	Short-tailed Albatrosses engage in elaborate courtship dances and tend to maintain long-term pair bonds.  They are graceful in flight but clumsy on land.  It is believed they can sleep while in flight, gliding on air currents and staying aloft without flapping for hours or even days at a time.	Squid is a staple of their diet, as it is with other albatrosses.  They occasionally follow fishing vessels, picking up offal from the boats; historically, they followed whaling ships.		Breeding colonies are currently limited to two Japanese Islands: Torishima and Minami-Kojima. Very long-lived birds, Short-tailed Albatrosses can live 40 to 60 years, and many do not breed until they are over ten years old.  Birds return to breed on the island where they hatched, and reuse the same nest site year after year.  The female lays a single egg on the ground, in a shallow scrape with no lining.  Both parents help incubate the egg and stay on the nest if harassed, even allowing themselves to be picked up off the egg.  The nesting season lasts from August to December, after which the birds return to sea until the next nesting season.	Young birds may stay at sea for as long as five years before first returning to land. After the breeding season, birds undertake extensive fall wanderings and can be found anywhere in the Pacific Ocean north of the Tropic of Cancer.	short-tailed_albatross				
339	20	Phoebastria	immutabilis	Laysan Albatross	Rare pelagic.	NT	The total population of Laysan Albatrosses is currently estimated at about 2.5 million, making it ten times more abundant than the other albatross of the Northern Hemisphere, the Black-footed Albatross. This number represents a major recovery from the first half of the 20th Century, when populations were decimated by feather hunters and military activity. The total breeding population consists of about 800,000 birds, with over 50% of these breeders nesting on the Midway Atoll, now a national wildlife refuge. Laysan Albatrosses have recently expanded their breeding range, colonizing new breeding grounds on the main Hawaiian Islands, the Bonin Islands, and off the coast of Baja. Despite their recovery and range expansion, there remain threats to the Laysan Albatross population. These birds are prone to being caught in fishing nets and on hooks, and in 1990 the estimated loss to driftnets was over 17,500 birds, almost one percent of the population. A species that lays only one egg each year and doesn't begin to breed until it is 8 or 9 years old is slow to recover from increased mortality.	The Laysan Albatross is a large, long-winged seabird. Its wings are gray-brown above with a varying degree of dark mixed with white below. Its tail is dark, and its head, belly, and rump are all white. Its face is distinctive, with a dark smudge around the eye and a large pale-pinkish bill.		1	During the breeding season, Laysan Albatrosses prefer open sand or grassy areas, on low, flat islands in the Hawaiian archipelago. During the non-breeding season, and year round for birds that have yet to attain breeding age, habitat is the open ocean, far from land. Laysan Albatrosses are most often found beyond the continental shelf, mostly in cold water. They are restricted to the Northern Hemisphere, unlike the majority of albatrosses, which are found in the Southern Hemisphere.	In spite of its larger population, the Laysan Albatross is seen less often off the coast of Washington than is the Black-footed Albatross. The Laysan Albatross is usually found farther offshore, although sightings have increased in recent decades. Younger birds remain south of the adults, closer to Japan. Birds sighted off the Washington coast are more likely to be adults. Laysan Albatrosses are best seen on offshore boat trips. Sightings are occasional, most common from September into early May.	Once they leave their breeding colony at the age of 5½ months, young birds spend the next three years at sea, never touching land. After that, they spend July through November at sea as well. During this time they land on the water to feed and sleep, and it is speculated that they can sleep even while airborne. Albatrosses have difficulty flying without wind.	Laysan Albatrosses forage while swimming, grasping prey from the water's surface. Much of the feeding is done at night, when the predominant prey, squid, is close to the surface. Fish, fish eggs, crustaceans, carrion, and refuse round out the diet.		A long-lived species, Laysan Albatrosses do not breed until they are 8-9 years old. After that, most breed annually and can live over 40 years. First-time breeders engage in an elaborate courtship display to establish pair bonds, which are kept for life. Laysan Albatrosses build their nests in colonies on the open ground, often near tall vegetation. Both sexes help build the nest, which is a shallow depression in the ground with a rim built up around it. The female lays a single egg which both sexes take turns incubating for over 9 weeks. For the first few weeks after the chick hatches, the parents take turns tending the chick and foraging, with foraging trips taking many days. The parents regurgitate stomach oil and partly digested stomach contents to feed the chick. The regurgitated material begins mostly as stomach oil, and as the chick ages, the percentage of oil is reduced. After 165 days on the island, the chick heads out to sea. The entire nesting process, from when the adults arrive at the colony to when they leave, takes 290 days, almost 80% of the year.	At the end of the breeding season in July, most birds head northwest toward Japan, and then northeast toward the Aleutians. They then turn south, back toward Hawaii to breed. Non-breeders wander throughout the northern Pacific Ocean year round.	laysan_albatross				
340	20	Phoebastria	nigripes	Black-footed Albatross	Common pelagic.	NT	The total population of Black-footed Albatrosses is estimated at 200,000 individuals, far fewer than that of Laysan Albatrosses.  Like the Laysan, the Black-footed Albatross population has experienced a recovery from the devastation by feather hunters and habitat degradation on nesting islands in the early part of the 20th Century. However drift nets and long-line fisheries kill thousands of birds each year. The IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources) has recently changed the status of this species from threatened to endangered on the basis of a projected future decline of more than 60% over the next three generations (56 years), based on present rates of incidental mortality from longline fisheries in the north Pacific Ocean.  One population in Japan nests near an active volcano which has the potential to destroy that entire population if it erupts. DDT and other pesticides were found at serious levels in 1969. This appears to be more of a concern for Black-footed than for Laysan Albatrosses because Black-footed Albatrosses get a greater portion of their food from scavenging.	A pelagic bird, usually seen only from boats, the Black-footed Albatross is solid brownish-gray, with a pale face and a lighter patch at the base of its tail.  It is unusual in that it is a dark albatross; most other albatrosses are predominantly white.  The Black-footed Albatross is relatively small for an albatross, but it is a very large, long-winged bird nonetheless.		1	Breeding habitat consists of sandy beaches and other open, flat areas on islands in the Hawaiian chain and a few islands off southern Japan. During the non-breeding season, Black-footed Albatrosses remain on the open ocean.  They are most commonly found over upwellings or the continental shelf, rarely close to shore.	Black-footed Albatrosses are the only albatrosses commonly seen off the Washington coast. The best way to see them is on offshore boat trips, where they are commonly seen from April through October, and uncommonly seen from November through March.	Once they leave their breeding colony at the age of 5½ months, young birds spend the next three years at sea, never touching land. After that, they spend July through November at sea as well. During this time they land on the water to feed and sleep, and it is speculated that they can sleep even while airborne. They follow ships at sea, feeding on the refuse left in their wakes. The Black-footed Albatross forages while swimming, dabbling like a duck to reach food near the surface of the water. It will also dive under water with its wings partially spread. Albatrosses have difficulty flying without wind.	Early morning and late afternoon are prime feeding times for the Black-footed Albatross. It preys on fish, squid, and crustaceans and also scavenges. Squid, fish, fish eggs, and crustaceans are its major food items, which it locates with its keen sense of smell. It also ingests floating plastic, apparently without harm to an adult; however, the plastic is harmful if fed to the chicks.		A long-lived species, Black-footed Albatrosses do not breed until they are at least five years old. First-time breeders engage in an elaborate courtship display to establish pair bonds, which are kept for life. After that, they generally breed annually. Colony nesters, they build their nests high on sandy, open beaches. Both sexes help build the nest, which is a shallow depression in the ground with a rim built up slightly around it. The nest is similar to that of the closely related Laysan Albatross, although with a less defined rim. The female lays a single egg which both sexes take turns incubating for over 9 weeks. For the first few weeks, the parents take turns tending the chick and foraging, with foraging trips taking many days. The parents regurgitate food for the chick. After 140-150 days on the island, the chick heads out to sea.	Adults spend the breeding season from November to June on the breeding colonies, after which they go to sea for the remainder of the year. Non-breeders and failed breeders leave the colony earlier, in April. While at sea, they can be found all across the northern Pacific.	black-footed_albatross				
341	19	Piaya	cayana	Squirrel Cuckoo		LC				0								squirrel_cuckoo				
342	18	Pica	hudsonia	Black-billed Magpie	Common resident east.	LC	Black-billed Magpies traditionally followed Native Americans and lived off the refuse of their bison hunts. Black-billed Magpies now frequent farms and ranches, and have been known to rob trap-lines, take poultry eggs, and raid orchards. They were considered vermin, and many Black-billed Magpies were killed as pests in the early 20th Century. They are still considered pests by some. Despite this, they remain common and widespread. They are protected in the United States, but not in Canada where they are still killed in some areas. Pesticides are of concern, especially those used on livestock, since magpies often perch on livestock and eat those pests that are being poisoned.	The Black-billed Magpie is a medium-sized bird with an extremely long tail. It is a highly distinctive bird of eastern Washington's open country. The magpie has black covering its head and extending through its breast and down its back. It has white at the base of its wings, on its belly, and on its upper and lower outer-wings. The rest of its wings and its long tail are iridescent blue-green. The juvenile is similar to the adult, but has less iridescence and a shorter tail.		1	Black-billed Magpies are found in open country, but need large shrubs or trees for nesting. They are especially suited to areas with cottonwood or willows, streams, farmland, wetlands, and orchards. During winter, they roost in streamside groves of trees or lowland conifers, although they avoid unbroken forests.	East of the Cascades, one can find Black-billed Magpies in open habitats year round. This is one of the most common and widespread birds of eastern Washington. Black-billed Magpies are very abundant in Yakima County and the Columbia-Snake River lowlands. They are extremely rarely reported in the western Washington lowlands in winter.	Black-billed Magpies are intelligent and resourceful opportunists. They form large, noisy roosts in winter, sometimes numbering over 700 birds. They flip items over to look for food, follow predators, and sometimes steal food from other birds. They also take ticks from the backs of large mammals, and pick at open sores on those animals' bodies. They can even use scent to find food--an unusual trait for birds, which generally have very little sense of smell. They are often very bold, but in areas where they have been harassed, they become quite wary.	Black-billed Magpies are omnivores but feed most often on insects. During post-breeding dispersal, they eat a number of conifer seeds. They eat berries, nuts, and seeds during winter. Black-billed Magpies also eat carrion.	Common in central and eastern Kittitas County in open country at low to middle elevations. Most often nests low in Russian olive groves, wetlands with willow trees, black hawthorn thickets, and plantings around farmsteads.	Black-billed Magpies are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds. Pairs first form in the fall or winter within wintering flocks. They often nest in small, loose colonies, but this may be more a factor of the distribution of trees for nesting rather than true colonialism. Both sexes help build a huge nest in the branches of a deciduous tree. The nest is used in succeeding years by many other species, e.g., owls. The nest itself is enveloped in a large (up to three feet in diameter), dome-shaped, stick canopy, with entrances on both sides. Inside the stick canopy is a cup-shaped nest with a mud or manure base and a lining made from weeds, rootlets, hair, and grass. The female lays up to 9 eggs, but the typical clutch ranges from 6-7 eggs. The male brings food while the female incubates (for about 18 days). Both feed the young after they hatch. The young leave the nest at 3-4 weeks, and join with 2-8 other broods. The parents feed their own fledglings in these groups for another 3-4 weeks.	Black-billed Magpies are year-round residents across their range, but occasionally undergo post-breeding movements upslope into the Cascades and the Blue Mountains.	black-billed_magpie				
343	47	Picoides	albolarvatus	White-headed Woodpecker	Uncommon resident east.	LC	Modern forestry practices and fragmentation of the Ponderosa pine forests have contributed to declines in Washington.  White-headed Woodpeckers are currently candidates for listing on the state endangered species list.  They are listed as a species-of-concern by Partners in Flight, Audubon~Washington, and the Washington State Gap Analysis project.  Protection of Ponderosa-pine habitat, modification of fire-suppression strategies, and retention of snags should help conserve this species.	The White-headed Woodpecker is the only North American woodpecker with a black body and a white head. It has white wing-patches at the wrists, visible both when the bird is perched and when it flies. Males have a red patch on the back of their crowns.		1	This species is restricted to relatively open Ponderosa pine forests at altitudes from 2,000 to 5,000 feet. In Washington, White-headed Woodpeckers are seldom found in coniferous forests higher than the Ponderosa pine zone.  This is one of the most tree-specific of the woodpeckers.	White-headed Woodpeckers are uncommon and local in the Ponderosa-pine forests of the eastern Cascades.  They are most easily located in Yakima and Klickitat Counties. They are also uncommon east of the Okanogan River and occur rarely in some areas of the Blue Mountains.  Specific sites where White-headed Woodpeckers may be found include the Wenas Campground (Yakima County), the Yakama Indian Reservation (Yakima County; no public access), Little Pend Oreille National Wildlife Refuge (Stevens County), Long Lake Dam (Lincoln/Stevens County), and Fields Spring State Park in the Blue Mountains (Asotin County).	White-headed Woodpeckers forage for insects on trunks and limbs as well as in clusters of needles. Because they pry rather than hammer bark from trees and forage by excavating cones, their foraging tends to be quieter than that of other woodpeckers. They do, however, drum during courtship like other woodpeckers.	White-headed Woodpeckers feed on insects and on pine and other conifer seeds. They rely heavily on seeds during fall and winter, more so than any other North American woodpecker except perhaps the Acorn Woodpecker.	Limited to Kittitas County, where uncommon and local in ponderosa pine zone. Thought to be declining, probably due to reduction of favored mature ponderosa pine forests. Prefers fairly open pine stands in proximity to high-quality riparian zones (Stepniewski 1999). Often excavates nest cavity low in snags. BBA records do not support predicted range in central county mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	Cavities are typically excavated in dead or diseased trees, often within 10 feet of the ground, lower than those of many other woodpeckers. Although cavities are not reused from year to year, the same tree will often be reused. Both sexes excavate the cavity, and both sexes incubate and feed the 4-5 young. Incubation typically lasts about 14 days, and young fledge at about 26 days.	White-headed Woodpeckers are generally considered permanent residents, but they are much harder to find during winter, and many may leave the region during this time.	white-headed_woodpecker				
344	47	Picoides	arcticus	Black-backed Woodpecker	Rare resident, mostly east.	LC	Fire suppression and logging practices that do not leave diseased or dying timber in the forests have negative impacts on the population of Black-backed Woodpeckers.  The size of any local population fluctuates with changing feeding conditions.  The species is currently a candidate for inclusion on the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife's endangered species list and is included on the Audubon~Washington list of species-at-risk.	Black-backed Woodpeckers have solid black upperparts, black tails with white outer tail feathers, light breasts, and dark barring on their sides and flanks.  Their heads are mostly black with prominent white moustachial stripes, and males have yellow crown-patches.  Like American Three-toed Woodpeckers, they have three rather than four toes on each foot. They are slightly larger than Three-toed woodpeckers and can be distinguished from them by their solid black backs.		1	Black-backed woodpeckers breed in mature or old-growth conifer forests, especially forests of spruce, larch, fir, pine, and hemlock.  In Washington, they can be found at moderate to high elevations, but they will come down into the Ponderosa pine zone after forest fires there.  They are strongly attracted to burns and arrive within a few months of fires.  They stay as long as prey is abundant, typically several years.  Their range and habitat overlap with those of American Three-toed Woodpeckers, though they prefer more open forests.	Black-backed Woodpeckers are uncommon permanent residents in Washington's mountains from the Cascade crest east, although a few have been reported on the west slopes of the Cascades.  Recent burns are the best places to search for this elusive bird.	Black-backed Woodpeckers are not wary of humans, but they are inconspicuous, although less so than American Three-toed Woodpeckers.  They are often detected by their foraging taps, bark prying, and drumming.  They tend to forage lower than American Three-toed Woodpeckers, but like American Three-toed Woodpeckers, they scale the bark from dead and dying trees, which gives evidence of their presence in an area. Where the two species occur together, Black-backed Woodpeckers are usually dominant.	Black-backed Woodpeckers feed principally on wood-boring beetle larvae.  They eat some other insects and some fruit as well.	In Kittitas County, uncommon in moderate- and high-elevation, open-canopy conifer forests, where very thinly distributed. Rare in King County at high elevation near Cascade crest, with two confirmed records during atlas period. Core range in drier forests at lower elevation than American Three-toed Woodpecker. Strongly attracted to burns and clearcut edges, so distribution may vary with availability of newly created preferred habitats.	Black-backed Woodpeckers form monogamous pairs and appear to stay together for more than one season.  Both members of the pair excavate a new nest cavity every year.   The nest is located in a dead or dying conifer tree, on a branch, or on a utility pole, usually near the edge of a forest opening. The entrance hole is typically beveled, and bark is chipped away at the bottom of the entrance hole.  The nest is lined with woodchips from the excavation but no other material.  Both sexes typically incubate the 3 to 4 eggs for 12 to 14 days and brood the young for the first few days after they hatch.  Both feed the young, which leave the nest after about 24 days.  The young are dependent on the parents for a few weeks after they fledge.  There is usually only a single brood each year.	Although resident in many areas, with no regular latitudinal migration, Black-backed Woodpeckers are irruptive and may travel long distances in search of recent burns or other sites where food is plentiful.	black-backed_woodpecker	BBWO			
345	47	Picoides	dorsalis	American Three-toed Woodpecker	Uncommon resident, mostly east.	LC	American Three-toed Woodpeckers are uncommon and local. Their inconspicuous nature, relatively small numbers, and irruptive behavior make it difficult to monitor the population.  The quantity and distribution of mature and old-growth forests probably limit their numbers, and data suggest that North American populations are declining, probably because of fire suppression and logging practices that do not leave the diseased and dying timber that hosts their main food source.	American Three-toed Woodpeckers have black and white barred backs, black wings, white breasts, black and white barred flanks, black tails with white outer tail feathers, and black heads with white moustchial and (usually) post-ocular stripes.  Males have yellow crown-patches.  As their name asserts, they have three rather than four toes on each foot.  They can be distinguished from Black-backed Woodpeckers by the barring on their backs and by their slightly smaller size.  Their foreheads are also speckled with white rather than being all black like those of Black-backed Woodpeckers, and their white moustachial stripes and yellow crown-patches are less clearly defined.		1	American Three-toed Woodpeckers breed in mature or old-growth boreal conifer forests, especially spruce, larch, fir, and pine. In North America they breed farther north than any other woodpecker, and in Washington they can be found at elevations from about 4,000 feet up to the tree line.  They will come down lower to burned and flooded areas with standing dead trees and to other areas undergoing heavy infestations of wood-boring beetles.  Their range and habitat overlap with those of Black-backed Woodpeckers, but they generally prefer denser forests.	American Three-toed Woodpeckers are uncommon to rare permanent residents in Washington's mountainous conifer forests from the Cascade crest east.  Some good places to look for this hard-to-find species are in the silver-fir forests on either side of Highway 12 at White Pass (Lewis County), in the Thunder Mountain burn (Okanogan County), Springs Campground (Okanogan County), Sherman Pass (Ferry County), Hart's Pass (Okanogan County), Colockum Pass (Kittitas County), and Fields Spring State Park (Asotin County).	American Three-toed Woodpeckers are not wary of humans, but they are also quiet and inconspicuous and can be difficult to see.  They often perch against tree trunks, and are usually solitary, although pairs may forage together.  They tend to forage higher on the trunk than Black-backed Woodpeckers, but like Black-backed Woodpeckers, they scale the bark off dead and dying trees while foraging, a behavior that often reveals their presence in an area.	Bark beetle larvae, especially spruce bark beetles, are the most common prey of the American Three-toed Woodpecker.  They also eat other insects and some fruit, and they visit sapsucker wells to feed on the sap.	Uncommon and local in higher-elevation coniferous forest in Kittitas County. Rare in King County with only three BBA records near Cascade crest, including confirmed breeding pair at Pyramid Creek. Sparse occurrence does not support generous range on west side of crest mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Generally found in dense closed-canopy forests, favoring Engelmann spruce (Opperman et al. 2003). Readily exploits insect infestations following forest burns, so distribution may vary with opportunity.	American Three-toed Woodpeckers form monogamous pairs and may stay together for more than one season.  Both members of the pair excavate a new nest cavity in a dead tree or branch every year.  The nest is lined with woodchips from the excavation, but the woodpeckers do not add any other lining.  Both sexes typically incubate the 4 eggs for 12 to 14 days and brood the young continuously for the first 4 days after they hatch.  Both feed the young, which leave the nest after 22 to 26 days.  The parents may divide the brood, each taking half tend for another 4 to 8 weeks.  Typically they raise only a single brood each year.	Although resident in many areas, with no regular latitudinal migration, American Three-toed Woodpeckers are somewhat nomadic and may move into areas after fires or insect outbreaks, although they are less responsive to fires than Black-backed Woodpeckers.  There is also some evidence of winter withdrawal into the lowlands.	american_three-toed_woodpecker				
346	47	Picoides	pubescens	Downy Woodpecker	Fairly common resident.	LC	Downy Woodpeckers are common and widespread throughout their range and seem to have adapted to human-inhabited areas.  They can take advantage of second-growth and ornamental plantings, which has resulted in greater numbers of Downy than Hairy Woodpeckers in the Puget Trough.  There are three recognized subspecies in Washington: those found in the far eastern portions of the state, those found along the eastern slopes of the Cascades, and those found in western Washington.	The Downy Woodpecker is the smallest of Washington's woodpeckers. Its plumage is a mix of black and white (but see below.) Its wings, lower back, and tail are black with white spots; its upper back and outer tail feathers are white. Its underside is white, and its head is marked with wide alternating black and white stripes.  Males have a red spot at the backs of their heads which females lack.  Downy Woodpeckers closely resemble the larger Hairy Woodpeckers, but Downys have relatively smaller bills, which give their heads a rounder, 'cuter' shape.  Downy Woodpeckers found in western Washington are considerably darker than their eastern Washington counterparts, with most of the areas described above as 'white' actually a dingy tan.  Juveniles look like adults but may have red on their foreheads.		1	Downy Woodpeckers typically inhabit broadleaved and mixed forests, especially those with black cottonwood and willow.  They are also often found in residential areas, along rivers and streams, and in orchards, city parks, and even agricultural areas as long as there are sufficient trees nearby.  They are sometimes found in conifer forests after the breeding season and especially in burned areas. However, Downy Woodpeckers generally prefer deciduous environments in contrast to Hairy Woodpeckers, which may often be found in coniferous forests.	Downy Woodpeckers are common year round in hardwood forests at low to moderate elevations throughout most of Washington.  They occur but are relatively uncommon in the Palouse area, where they are generally restricted to streamsides, and in the Columbia Basin east of the Potholes reservoir, although they are fairly common around the Tri-cities.	Downy Woodpeckers maintain feeding territories year round but often join winter flocks of chickadees and nuthatches. They are acrobatic foragers that can hang upside-down and reach the outermost tips of branches. Males tend to forage farther out than females, which stay closer to the trunk.  Downy Woodpeckers will also forage on mullein stalks and other herbaceous vegetation, but generally they feed by exploring bark crevices.	Insects, especially beetles and ants, are the main food of Downy Woodpeckers.  They also feed on berries, seeds, and suet.	Fairly common in Kitsap and Island Counties. In King County, common at low elevation, becoming much less common at moderate elevation and uncommon and local at high elevation. In Kittitas County, common primarily at moderate elevation, becoming uncommon closer to Cascade crest. Only one record along Columbia River, <i>contra</i> Washington Gap report's predicted distribution along entire Kittitas County shore (Smith et al. 1997). This small woodpecker prefers hardwood and mixed forests, residential areas with hardwood trees, and hardwood-dominated riparian areas.	Downy Woodpeckers form monogamous breeding pairs in late winter.  Both members of the pair excavate nesting and roosting holes in soft or rotten wood.  They often situate their cavity entrance in a spot surrounded by lichen or fungus, which helps to camouflage the hole.  Both parents incubate the 4 to 5 eggs for about 12 days, and both feed the young.  The young leave the nest after 20 to 25 days but follow the parents around for a few weeks thereafter.  Each pair typically raises one brood a year.	Downy Woodpeckers are permanent residents in most areas, but the northernmost populations may move some distance south or to lower elevations in the winter.  During winter, they may be found in orchards and other wooded areas where they do not breed, indicating some seasonal movement.	downy_woodpecker	DOWO			
347	47	Picoides	villosus	Hairy Woodpecker	Fairly common resident.	LC	While Hairy Woodpeckers are still widespread and common throughout their range, their populations in many areas have probably declined from historic levels.  Forestry practices that remove snags and large trees have reduced nesting and roosting areas, and the introduced European Starlings and House Sparrows compete for nesting and roosting sites.  In the Puget Trough, where hardwoods have mostly replaced mature conifer forest, Hairy Woodpeckers are now less common than Downys.  There are three recognized subspecies in Washington: those found in the far eastern part of the state, those found in the Cascades, and those found in western Washington.	The plumage of Hairy Woodpeckers is a mix of black and white (but see below). Its wings, lower back, and tail are black with white spots; its upper back and outer tail feathers are white. Its underside is white, and its head is marked with wide alternating black and white stripes.  Males have a red spot at the backs of their heads which females lack.  Hairy Woodpeckers closely resemble Downy Woodpeckers but are larger and have much longer bills.  Hairy Woodpeckers found in western Washington are considerably darker than their eastern Washington counterparts, with most of the areas described above as 'white' actually a dingy tan color. Juveniles look like adults, but some have red on their foreheads.		1	In Washington, the typical habitat of Hairy Woodpeckers is mature coniferous forest, although they are common in hardwood and mixed forests in other parts of their range.  In Washington, they also frequent burned forests, mixed forests, wooded parks, and conifer-lined streams and shorelines.  They require areas with heavier, more mature tree cover than Downy Woodpeckers and are more dependent on the presence of large trees.	Hairy Woodpeckers can be found in appropriate habitat at low to moderate elevations up through the sub-alpine zone throughout Washington.  In the Cascades, they are the most widespread and frequently seen woodpeckers.  They are present year round, but can be harder to find in winter, especially in the western interior valleys. In winter, they are more common on the east slopes of the Cascades.	Hairy Woodpeckers forage primarily on the trunks or main limbs of trees, where they probe into crevices and scale off bark searching for prey. They drum frequently in spring.	Bark-boring and wood-boring beetle larvae in dead and dying trees are the main food of Hairy Woodpeckers.  They also feed on sap from sapsucker holes, berries, nuts, seeds, and suet.	Fairly common and widespread in conifer-dominated forests in Island, Kitsap, and King Counties at all elevations, although nearly absent from urbanized areas. Common in northern and western Kittitas County in all forested habitats. Ranges into subalpine forests, where rivals Northern Flicker as most common woodpecker. Two recognizable subspecies in area: dusky-bellied <i>P.v. harrisi</i> of western lowlands and white-bellied <i>P.v. orius</i> of Cascades.	Hairy Woodpeckers form monogamous breeding pairs in late winter, and pairs from previous seasons often re-pair.  Both members of the pair excavate nesting and roosting holes in soft or rotten wood, especially in aspens or dead conifers.  Although Hairy Woodpeckers spend most of their time in coniferous forests, they prefer to nest in deciduous trees.  Both parents incubate the 4 eggs for about 14 days, and both feed the young.  The young leave the nest after 28 to 30 days and follow the parents around for some time thereafter.  Each pair of Hairy Woodpeckers typically raises one brood each year.	Hairy Woodpeckers are generally considered permanent residents, although some may move south or into lower elevations, especially into tall trees along lowland streams during winter.	hairy_woodpecker	HAWO			
348	24	Pinicola	enucleator	Pine Grosbeak	Uncommon to rare resident.	LC	There are two subspecies of Pine Grosbeaks in Washington--those that breed in the Cascades and eastern Washington, and those that breed on the Olympic Peninsula.  Their conservation status in Washington and throughout their range is not well known.  There is some evidence that northeastern populations are not as abundant as they once were, but more information is needed.	Pine Grosbeaks are the largest of Washington's finches.  Males are mostly red with gray underparts, black wings, and two white wing-bars.  Females are mostly gray with some yellow on their heads and backs.  Their wings are black with white wing-bars similar to the males.  Both sexes have black tails, and their bills are short and conical.  First-year males typically have rusty heads and rumps, but are not as red overall as mature males.		1	Pine Grosbeaks breed in sub-arctic and boreal conifer forests.  In Washington, they are typically found in lodgepole pine, mountain hemlock, subalpine fir, whitebark pine, and Engleman spruce.  They generally breed in wet areas or other openings near the tree line.  Their non-breeding habitat is determined by available food, but often contains mountain ash, ash, maple, and other broadleaved trees.	Pine Grosbeaks are uncommon to rare year round in the mountains of Washington, and rare in the lowlands on both sides of the Cascades in winter.  They breed locally along the length of the Cascades, in the Olympics, the Blue Mountains, and in northeastern Washington, typically over 3,000-4,000 feet.  They become more common as you go east in Washington, with the exception of the Blue Mountains, where they are quite uncommon.	During the breeding season, Pine Grosbeaks are typically found in pairs, but form larger flocks the rest of the year.  They forage on the ground, in trees, shrubs, and in the air.  They are attracted to 'Pygmy-Owl tooting,' a common practice of birders used to imitate a Pygmy-Owl and attract birds.  They often allow very close approach by humans, but may be missed because they will sit motionless.	Seeds, fruit, buds, berries, and some insects make up the majority of the Pine Grosbeak's diet.  They feed insects and spiders to their young, but adults eat more than 90% vegetable matter throughout the year.	In Washington, rare breeder in Olympics, along Cascade crest, and in mountains of northeastern part of state in subalpine forests and parklands dominated by mountain hemlock, subalpine fir, and Engelmann spruce. No confirmed BBA records from our area, but three probable and four possible records suggestive of likely breeding. Favorable nesting habitat found at elevations above 4,000 feet along Cascade crest north of Snoqualmie Pass and east in Wenatchee Mountains to Navaho Peak, as mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	Pine Grosbeaks are generally monogamous, and form pairs before they arrive on the breeding grounds.  The nest is typically located in dense foliage on a horizontal branch near the trunk of a tree, or in a vertical fork.  The female builds the nest, which is a bulky, open cup of twigs and rootlets, lined with fine grass, moss, rootlets, and lichen.  She incubates 3 to 4 eggs for 13 to 14 days.  The male brings food to the female on the nest.  Both members of the pair feed the young, which leave the nest after about 15 days.  The young can fly well within a few days of hatching, but continue to beg for food from their parents for some time after fledging.  Pairs generally raise one brood each season.	Pine Grosbeaks are permanent residents in many areas.  In eastern parts of their range, they can be irruptive, traveling long distances to areas well beyond their regular breeding grounds.  Irruptive movements in the western portion of their range are less common, and Pine Grosbeaks in Washington are usually not found far from their breeding areas.  If they do migrate, it is generally into nearby lowlands.	pine_grosbeak	PIGR			
349	42	Pipilo	chlorurus	Green-tailed Towhee	Rare and local summer east.	LC	Breeding Bird Survey records indicate that there have been no major changes in the Washington population since 1966.  Humans have had both positive and negative effects on Green-tailed Towhee populations.  Fire suppression may reduce habitat, but logging may provide more habitat.  The replacement of sagebrush with non-native grasses has probably had a significant negative impact on Green-tailed Towhee habitat overall.  The Washington population is very small and limited in area.  This population is at the northern edge of the range and because of this is not likely to ever be widespread or common in Washington.	The Green-tailed Towhee is gray underneath with greenish upperparts.  Adults have a rufous crown and a white throat-patch.  Juvenile birds are brown-and-white streaked, with a yellowish wash on their wings.		1	A bird of the dry, shrubby hillsides of far-southeastern Washington, the Green-tailed Towhee breeds in areas with a high diversity of shrub species providing dense, low cover.  During migration and winter, it is found in similar habitats, often near streams.	Green-tailed Towhees are local and uncommon breeders at moderate elevations in steep, shrubby areas of the Blue Mountains in far-southeastern Washington.  They breed at the Wenatchee Guard Station, the Asotin Creek Wildlife Area in Asotin County, and along the south slopes of the Blue Mountains, at Biscuit Ridge, near Dixie in Walla Walla County.	In winter, Green-tailed Towhees can be found in mixed flocks.  These secretive birds forage on the ground and in low bushes, scratching leaf litter with both feet.	Small insects and seeds make up the majority of the Green-tailed Towhee's diet.  They also eat some fruit.		The male defends a territory and attracts a mate by singing from a prominent spot, often a raised perch.  Females arrive on the breeding grounds about a week after the males, and monogamous pairs form shortly after that.  The female builds a bulky but well-concealed nest on the ground or in a low shrub, within three feet of the ground.  The nest is made of twigs, grass, weeds, and bark, and lined with grass, rootlets, and hair.  The female lays 3 to 4 eggs and incubates them for about 12 days.  Both parents feed the chicks.  The young leave the nest at 11 to 14 days of age, but are not yet able to fly.  The parents continue to feed and tend the young until they can fly and fend for themselves.	The Green-tailed Towhee is the only entirely migratory towhee.  Staying only briefly in Washington, these birds arrive on the breeding grounds in June and leave for Mexico and the southwestern US in August.	green-tailed_towhee				
350	42	Pipilo	maculatus	Spotted Towhee	Common resident. Uncommon winter east.	LC	In 1995, the Rufous-sided Towhee was split into two species, the Eastern Towhee and the Spotted Towhee. Spotted Towhees found on either side of the Cascades are considered two different subspecies. Spotted Towhees were formerly rare in western Washington, especially along the coast. The clear-cutting of extensive forests has provided additional shrubby habitat and enabled the Spotted Towhee population to increase in this part of the state. Throughout Washington, Breeding Bird Survey data have detected a significant increase since 1966.	The Spotted Towhee is a distinctive bird that is often heard before it is seen, scraping about in the brush. The deep chestnut flanks and sides combined with the male's solid black head, red eye, and black upperparts are distinctive. The belly is white, and the white spots on the wings give this bird its name. The white at the corners of the long tail is visible in flight. Females appear similar to males, but are dark brown while males are black. Juvenile towhees are heavily streaked. Towhees in Eastern Washington are more heavily spotted than their western counterparts, with larger spots and more white on their tails.		1	Spotted Towhees are found in shrubby habitats in forested lowlands throughout Washington. They often use shrubby thickets in residential areas, on clear-cuts, and around wetlands. In eastern Washington, they use edges and riparian areas near shrub-steppe.	Spotted Towhees are common on both sides of the Cascades during the breeding season. In eastern Washington, they are common in appropriate habitat from late April to mid-September, and uncommon the rest of the year. Those that stay through the winter in eastern Washington may be found in lowland riparian areas and developed towns. They are common year round in western Washington, although less common in coastal forests than in other parts of the region.	Mainly a ground-forager, the Spotted Towhee uses a two-footed scratching method, kicking both feet backward at the same time to locate food under the litter. This movement is often quite loud, and when the birds are in thick cover, the sound of them foraging is one of the best ways to locate them. Towhees prefer to forage in areas with a thick layer of leaf litter and a screen of foliage and twigs low to the ground. These birds sometimes forage in trees as well, a practice that is most common in spring. Spotted Towhees occasionally sun themselves, lying down on the grass with feathers spread.  They have several distinctive calls and songs, and readily respond to 'pishing.'	Spotted Towhees are primarily seedeaters, although in the breeding season they eat and feed their young many insects and other arthropods.	Common throughout at low and moderate elevations in shrubby habitats such as regenerating clearcuts and wetland edge. Particularly successful in highly altered landscapes of Puget Trough lowlands, including most of urban and suburban core where thrives in backyards and neighborhood parks. Follows low river valleys well into mountains (especially Greenwater, Green, Skykomish). In Kittitas County, most common at moderate elevations in ponderosa pine belt and ponderosa pine/shrub-steppe ecotone, somewhat less common in riparian and irrigated habitats in steppe zone. Scarce or absent at higher elevations on both sides of Cascade crest.	Males defend their territories by singing, and pairing begins as early as February. In April, the female picks a nest site on the ground, or close to it. Nests are usually well concealed by adjacent plants but are not typically inside thickets. When built on the ground, the nest is sunk into the leaf litter so that the rim of the nest cup is even with the litter surface. The female builds the nest of bark, grass, and leaves and lines it with pine needles, hair, and other fine material. She lays 3 to 5 eggs and incubates them for 12 to 14 days. Both parents feed the young. They leave the nest at 9 to 11 days, but do not fly for another six days. The parents continue to feed the young, which stay in the parents' territory for about 30 days after they leave the nest. Each pair usually raises only one brood per season.	Spotted Towhees vary in their migration patterns. Western Washington birds are resident. Although some eastern Washington birds remain at lower elevations, most leave the area for wintering grounds in the western and southwestern United States.	spotted_towhee	SPTO			
351	12	Piranga	ludoviciana	Western Tanager	Common summer resident.	LC	Western Tanagers do not seem to require large patches of forest, but do appear to prefer large patches to small fragments, and may prefer old growth in some areas.  They use a wide range of winter habitats, and the protection of shade-coffee plantations provides increased wintering grounds.  The Breeding Bird Survey has recorded a significant increase in Western Tanagers in Washington since 1966.	Western Tanagers are distinctive summer visitors to our area and are the only tanagers found regularly in Washington. Their bills are of medium thickness, thinner than those of seed-eaters and thicker than those of insectivores.  Adult males are bright yellow and black, with orange-red heads.  It would be difficult to mistake an adult male for any other bird in Washington.  All plumages are mostly yellow, with dark tails and two wing-bars on each wing.  The dark markings are solid black on mature males and gray to brown on females and juveniles.  Males have one white and one yellow wing-bar on each wing.  Both wing-bars may be white, or one may be pale yellow on females, which are duller yellow than males.  First-year males have little or no red on their heads.		1	Western Tanagers are typically found in open coniferous or mixed coniferous and broadleaved forests, although they are very wide-ranging in different habitats.  They are common in forest openings, and they seem most at home in the dry Douglas-fir forests of eastern Washington, but they are much more widely distributed than that. They are least at home in dense, coastal rain forests.  During migration they can be seen in a wide variety of habitats, including suburban yards, grasslands, shrub-steppe, and orchards.  In winter, Western Tanagers inhabit tropical pine-oak woodlands, and will frequent shade-coffee plantations.	Western Tanagers are widespread throughout Washington between May and September. They are quite common in forested areas of eastern Washington, especially in Ponderosa-pine and Douglas-fir forests.  They are uncommon in highly developed areas as breeders. They are common in the Puget Trough lowlands during migration. Some rarely linger into early winter, apparently more in recent years.	Treetop-foragers, Western Tanagers glean food from foliage and branches, and fly out to catch aerial prey.  Although they are brightly colored, they are often inconspicuous and difficult to observe.  They are most easily seen during migration when they may be found in atypical habitats.	Although Western Tanagers are adapted for eating fruit, they eat mostly insects during the breeding season.  During winter, they eat many fruits and berries.  They may also eat flower nectar.	Fairly common in coniferous forests throughout, becoming common in dry-forest zones of Kittitas County and in relatively intact forests of King County foothills. Found to at least 3,000 feet in eastern Cascades, but uncommon in moist, higher-elevation forests west of crest. Prefers fairly open forest with intervening wetlands or clearcuts, but intolerant of large-scale forest fragmentation. Uncommon in residential suburbs of western counties; nearly absent as successful breeder within more densely urbanized areas. Unknown percentage of mapped records reflects migrants and failed breeders, which continue to move throughout summer season.	Western Tanagers are monogamous breeders.  Pairs may form on the wintering grounds or during migration.  They often nest in conifers, but will sometimes nest in aspen, oak, or other broadleaved trees.  The female builds the nest, which is a shallow, open cup, usually placed in a horizontal fork, well out from the trunk.  The nest is typically made of twigs and grass, lined with hair and rootlets.  The female incubates 3 to 5 eggs for about 13 days, and broods the young for the first few days after hatching.  Both parents feed and tend the young, which leave the nest after about 11 days, but stay close to the parents for about two more weeks.	Western Tanagers are Neotropical migrants that winter in Mexico and Central America.  They migrate at night and travel at high altitudes.  They are usually alone or in pairs, but occasionally migrate in flocks.  They tend to be relatively late-spring and early-fall migrants.	western_tanager	WETA			
352	12	Piranga	olivacea	Scarlet Tanager		LC				0								scarlet_tanager				
353	12	Piranga	rubra	Summer Tanager		LC		One record, a bird visiting a Skagit County feeder in December-January.		1								summer_tanager				
354	10	Plectrophenax	hyperboreus	McKay's Bunting		LC		Two records of birds wintering with Snow Buntings at Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County), and another from the Lummi Flats (Whatcom County) in November.		1								mckays_bunting				
355	10	Plectrophenax	nivalis	Snow Bunting	Fairly common winter east, rare west.	LC	Throughout their range, Snow Buntings are common and widespread, although the number of birds present in one area in any given year varies greatly.  Pesticides and Arctic habitat destruction are potential threats, but at the moment their nesting and wintering habitats are extensive and numbers appear stable.	In breeding plumage, male Snow Buntings are unmistakable, with white bodies, long, black wings, and white wing-patches.  In winter plumage, which is how they look most of the time they are in Washington, males are whitish, with black streaks down the back and a rusty wash over the upperparts.  The tail is white, bordering a black wedge.  The wings are mostly white with black tips.  Females in non-breeding plumage look like non-breeding males.  During the breeding season, females look similar to breeding-season males, but the black back is streaked with white, and the head is streaky gray.  Unlike most birds with different breeding and non-breeding plumages, buntings molt only once a year.  In the fall, they molt into the non-breeding plumage.  By spring, the outer tips of the feathers have worn off to reveal the breeding plumage underneath.		1	Breeding habitat is barren tundra with rock piles, boulder fields, and other rocky outcroppings that are used as nesting sites.  In winter, Snow Buntings inhabit a variety of open lands, including short-grass prairie, farmland, beaches, and roadsides.	A winter visitor to Washington, the Snow Bunting is seen from Mid-October through March.  They are found in open areas of central and eastern Washington, and can often be seen along US Route 2.  Along the coast they can be seen in open dunes and grassy areas.  They can occasionally be seen in the Puget Trough, rarely in Seattle, and more often in the northern Sound by Bellingham.	Across their range, flocks can reach the thousands and are often in the hundreds, although in Washington, flocks are usually much smaller.  These flocks move around a lot from place to place, so their winter distribution can be spotty and ever changing.  As they move through a field, birds at the back of the flock fly over the rest of the group to move to the front, making it appear that the flock is rolling.  Ground-foragers, Snow Buntings are found in flocks outside of the breeding season.	Seeds are part of the Snow Bunting's diet year round, but especially in winter.  During summer, they eat more insects and spiders, and the young are fed almost entirely an invertebrate diet.  Birds in coastal areas may also eat tiny crustaceans.		Males arrive on the breeding grounds up to six weeks before the females.  Territories with rock piles appropriate for nesting are hard to come by, so competition for territories is strong.  They also sometimes nest on buildings.  Nests are usually in protected crevices and rock cavities, although in populated areas, artificial nests may be used.  The female builds a thick-walled nest of grass, lichen, moss, and roots, lined with fine grass, rootlets, plant down, feathers, and hair.  She incubates 3 to 9 eggs for 10 to 16 days.  Rock crevices in this harsh environment can be cold places, and the male feeds the female while she is on the nest so she doesn't often need to leave the nest during incubation.  Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest at 10 to 17 days.  The parents continue to feed the young for 8 to 12 days after they leave the nest, although the young start catching some of their own food within 3 to 5 days.  Snow Buntings typically only raise one brood a year.	Snow Buntings migrate in small, loose flocks.  Males arrive on their Arctic breeding grounds in early April. Females follow in May, and both leave in the fall, arriving in and passing through Washington in mid-October.  They winter throughout the open country of the northern United States and temperate Canada.	snow_bunting	SNBU			
356	64	Plegadis	chihi	White-faced Ibis		LC		Rare and probably increasing visitor on both sides of Cascades, mostly May'July. Sometimes appears in large flocks.		1								white-faced_ibis				
357	64	Plegadis	falcinellus	Glossy Ibis		LC		The first state record was photographed at Nisqually National Wildlife Refuge (Thurston County) on 30 May 2005.		1								glossy_ibis				
358	15	Pluvialis	dominica	American Golden-Plover	Uncommon to rare migrant west, mostly fall.	LC	The American Golden-Plover's breeding range is relatively safe from human exploitation, but migratory routes and winter ranges are under pressure from agriculture and urbanization.  Populations have not recovered to historic numbers since the American Golden-Plover was hunted excessively in the late 19th Century, and may be limited by loss of winter habitat.  However, this species does not appear to be threatened at this time.	American Golden-Plovers have dark brown upper parts, spangled with gold to pale yellow or whitish.  A white stripe extends from the forehead, over the eyes, to the wings.  Breeding males are solid black from chin to under-tail coverts.  Females are duller in color.  Non-breeding adults and juveniles have white throats, gray-brown breasts, and white bellies.  The breasts and sides may be striped with brown, or spotted in juveniles. American Golden-Plovers can be distinguished from Black-bellied Plovers by their smaller size, dark rump and wings, and gray under the wing.  Distinction from the Pacific Golden-Plover is tricky. Consult a good field guide.		1	During the spring and fall migration, American Golden-Plovers use a variety of habitats including coastal mudflats and estuaries, and adjacent salt marshes and fields.  American Golden-Plovers nest primarily on arctic and subarctic tundra of North America, and winter on South American grasslands.	A very few American Golden-Plovers may be found on the outer coast in the spring, as they move through Washington in April and May.  The longer fall migration period lasts from August through October, and flocks of 50-150 are regularly seen in places such as Grays Harbor and Leadbetter Point.  They are regularly but rarely recorded around Puget Sound and in eastern Washington.  Adults make up the majority of birds seen in August, while most of the birds in September and October are juveniles.  A few individuals may occasionally winter in Washington.	Although the American Golden-Plover commonly walks and runs, it is capable of swift and extended flight.  During migration, American Golden-Plovers roost and fly in flocks.  They are highly territorial on breeding grounds, and some individuals defend feeding territories on wintering grounds.  American Golden-Plovers forage in typical plover fashion, stopping and running, then pecking at the ground.	Their diet consists of small mollusks, crustaceans, and a variety of insects.  Berries are an important food item in the spring and fall.		Within a few days of arrival on nesting grounds, males begin territorial display flights, and pairing takes place.  Males produce a nest scrape and line the nest with lichen.  American Golden-Plover nests are located on dry, open tundra.  Females lay four eggs.    Males usually incubate during the day, and females incubate at night.  Chicks are extremely precocial and can feed themselves within a few hours of hatching.  Both parents tend the young.  American Golden-Plovers have a maximum of one brood per season.	American Golden-Plovers are long-distance migrants, traveling back and forth between arctic North America to southern South America each year.	american_golden-plover				
359	15	Pluvialis	fulva	Pacific Golden-Plover	Uncommon to rare migrant west, mostly fall.	LC	Pacific Golden-Plovers were hunted in Hawaii until 1941, but with subsequent protection, populations have recovered.  Pacific Golden-Plovers do not appear to be threatened at this time, although commercialized exploitation and habitat loss still occur in parts of their winter range.	Pacific Golden-Plovers have dark brown upperparts, spangled with gold to pale yellow or white.  A white stripe extends from the forehead, over the eyes, to the wings.  Breeding males are solid black from chin to under-tail coverts.  Females are duller in color.  They are similar in appearance to American Golden-Plovers, but have shorter wings, brighter yellow markings on their upperparts, and mostly white under-tail coverts and sides.  Non-breeding adults have yellow-edged upperparts and yellowish heads and necks.  Juveniles have a golden cast to head and neck and spotted upperparts.  Distinction between these two species is not easy.  Be sure to consult a good field guide.		1	Migrating Pacific Golden-Plovers are typically found in coastal habitats such as mudflats, estuaries, and open ocean beaches.  They nest on Arctic and subarctic Alaskan tundra, and may winter on islands in the Pacific Ocean as far south as Australia. Others go no farther for the winter than California beaches.	These plovers are found mostly on the outer coast.  A few may be found on the outer coast in the spring.  During the fall, flocks are seen regularly along the coast near Grays Harbor and Leadbetter Point.  Pacific Golden-Plovers may be more common than American Golden-Plovers on the Washington coast.	Pacific Golden-Plovers are territorial on breeding grounds, and some individuals defend feeding territories on wintering grounds.  They are swift in flight, but are more commonly seen roosting or foraging on the ground.  Pacific Golden-Plovers spread out while foraging.  They are visual foragers and feed by running and seizing prey.	Pacific Golden-Plovers feed on a variety of invertebrates such as mollusks, crustaceans, and insects.  They also eat berries, leaves, seeds, and occasionally small vertebrates.		Males may begin territorial display flights the day of arrival on tundra nesting grounds.  Pairs form within a few days.  The male builds a shallow scrape nest lined with lichen in sites with more vegetation than those chosen by American Golden-Plovers.  The female lays four eggs, and both parents incubate.  The male usually incubates during the day, the female at night.  Chicks are precocial and can feed themselves within a few hours of hatching.  Both parents tend the young.  Pacific Golden-Plovers have one brood per season.	Pacific Golden-Plovers may cover 2,000 miles in a single nonstop flight from Alaska to the Pacific Islands, or they may stop along the way.  Pacific Golden-Plovers and American Golden-Plovers overlap in time and location during migration, but Pacifics tend to migrate later.  Spring migration takes place mainly in April and May, and fall migration lasts from August through October.  A few individuals may not migrate.	pacific_golden-plover				
360	15	Pluvialis	squatarola	Black-bellied Plover	Common winter west. Uncommon migrant east.	LC	Their arctic breeding habitat is at low risk of human occupation and development.  Christmas Bird Counts indicate that regional wintering populations are increasing.	The Black-bellied Plover is Washington's largest plover.  The breeding adult male is solid black from chin to belly.  The upperparts are white or white mottled with black.  The female is more brownish than black.  Juveniles and birds in non-breeding plumage are speckled gray-brown above with a gray-brown breast and white belly.  A white rump is visible in all plumages.  The breast and sides are heavily streaked in the juvenile.  In flight, black axillaries contrast with white under-wing coverts.		1	Black-bellied Plovers winter on sandy beaches and estuarine mud flats around the world.  They are also found in wet, plowed fields and grassy meadows near the coast and on inland marine waters.  They nest on dry arctic tundra.	Black-bellied Plovers can be found year round on outer beaches such as Ocean 
Shores, Grays Harbor, and Leadbetter Point, but are less common in the summer, when only non-breeders remain.  They are uncommon in Puget Sound.  Juveniles regularly migrate through the interior, especially from late August to October.	Black-bellied Plovers often roost and fly in flocks, but spread out when foraging.  In winter, they commonly feed in association with Dunlin.  Like other plovers, Black-bellied plovers are visual feeders, but they may also probe for hidden prey.	On their wintering grounds, Black-bellied Plovers feed on polychaete worms, bivalves, and crustaceans.  On their breeding grounds, they primarily eat insects.		The Black-bellied Plover nests on dry tundra, often on a raised area with good visibility.  The male begins a scrape nest, and the female lines it with pebbles and bits of vegetation.  Females typically lay four eggs, and both parents incubate.  The young may forage within 12 hours, but tend to stay in the nest longer than other shorebirds.  Both parents care for the young and have one brood per season.	Although Black-bellied Plovers occur year round on the outer coast of Washington, they are especially common during migration (April to May and July to October) and in winter.  Immatures of both sexes can be seen throughout the summer.	black-bellied_plover	BBPL			
361	48	Podiceps	auritus	Horned Grebe	Common winter.  Rare inland breeder.	VU	Since most populations of Horned Grebes breed in low densities at high latitudes, data on population numbers are inconclusive.  Threats to the population include oil spills, pesticide contamination, and degradation of breeding habitat due to agriculture.  Also of concern is the contraction of the North American breeding range toward the northwest for unknown reasons.  This range contraction may signal a decline in overall numbers.	The Horned Grebe is a small grebe with a straight bill, thick neck, and squarish head.  In breeding plumage, Horned Grebes have rufous necks and bellies, gray backs, and black heads with a solid yellow patch from each eye to the back of the head.  Juveniles are gray-buff, with the lower half of the face white.  Non-breeding adults are gray-black with white on the lower half of the face and neck.		1	In winter Horned Grebes are usually found on salt water in coastal bays and exposed shores, and far less commonly on fresh water.  During the nesting season they inhabit lakes with a mix of open water and wetland vegetation.	North-central Washington is the extreme southwestern limit of the summer range of this species, which is typically considered a more northern, boreal breeder. Breeding records in Washington are few and infrequent, but there have been records of breeding birds in northeastern Washington.  During winter Horned Grebes are a very common visitor on the coast, in Puget Sound, and in other inland marine waters. They are uncommon in winter in the interior valleys west of the Cascades but have been found occasionally in the slackwater sections of the Columbia River in summer.	Less gregarious than the similar Eared Grebe, Horned Grebes are intensely territorial on their nesting grounds.  Like other grebes, Horned Grebes engage in elaborate courtship displays.	In summer Horned Grebes feed mostly on insects and crustaceans, which they catch under water.  In winter they eat fish, crustaceans, mollusks, and some insects.		Together males and females build a nest in marsh vegetation.  The nest is a floating pile of wet plant material, anchored to emergent vegetation.  The female lays four to five eggs, and both parents help incubate the eggs for 22 to 25 days.  Both parents feed the young, which can swim shortly after hatching and often ride on the parents' backs.  The young can fly at 55 to 60 days.	Horned Grebes migrate singly over land by night and along the coast by day.  They leave inland freshwater nesting sites and travel medium distances to coastal marine sites.	horned_grebe	HOGR			
362	48	Podiceps	grisegena	Red-necked Grebe	Common winter west.  Fairly common inland breeder.	LC	While populations appear stable, status is not well known.  Both breeding and wintering habitats have experienced and are vulnerable to degradation and destruction.  Red-necked Grebes appear to be sensitive to disturbance during nesting, and stable water levels are preferred over fluctuating ones, such as those regulated by dams.  While no clear population trends have been documented, Red-necked Grebes have been listed as a species of special concern in some areas.  A positive note is that Red-necked Grebes readily use artificial wetlands.	A mid-sized grebe with a long, heavy bill and thick neck, the Red-necked Grebe is the only grebe in Washington with a red neck and a white chin in breeding plumage.  Breeding plumage is characterized by a dark body, red neck, white cheeks, and black crown.  Juveniles and adults in non-breeding plumage are an overall grayish-brown.		1	Red-necked Grebes are found in distinctly different habitats at different times of year.  During summer they nest on large freshwater lakes, sloughs, and reservoirs.  They prefer areas with stable water levels and require emergent vegetation to anchor their floating nests.  During winter they are found predominantly on salt water, most commonly in protected bays, marshes, and coasts. However in winter they can also be found miles offshore.	Red-necked Grebes are common breeders in the northeastern part of the state, especially in the lower river valleys. Valleys with confirmed nesting records include Curlew Creek, Kettle River, Columbia River, Deep Creek, Cedar Creek, Colville River, Sanpoil River, and Pend Oreille River. Throughout these valleys Red-necked Grebes are found on sloughs, ponds, lakes, and reservoirs, not on moving water.  During winter they are common along the coast of Washington and in Puget Sound. They are seen fairly frequently in Lake Washington and several weeks annually in Lake Sammamish ((late November through December). Locations are American Lake, O.O. Denny Park, Sand Point, Kirkland, Marymoor Park, and Lake Sammamish State Park.  Look for them in these same locations in March and April.	Although large rafts of these birds can be seen in the Atlantic in winter, Washington's wintering Red-necked Grebes are solitary. During the breeding season, Red-necked Grebes are noisy and conspicuous.  Like other grebes, Red-necked Grebes have a complex courtship, with many detailed displays.  In the breeding season Red-necked Grebes are highly territorial against other species of water birds. They will defend their territories with underwater attack-dives.	In the winter small fish make up most of the diet.  In summer insects become more important as a food source.		Red-necked Grebes build their nests in shallow water with marsh vegetation.  Both male and female help build a floating nest made of plant material and anchored to emergent vegetation.  Typically, the female lays two to four eggs.  Some nests have many more eggs, but it has been suggested that these large clutches are the product of more than one female.  The young are fed by both parents and often ride on their backs.  Shortly after hatching, they can swim by themselves.	When migrating, Red-necked Grebes fly over land at night and over coastlines by day.  They arrive on their breeding territories in April and leave in September.  Migration is short distance, typically between fresh and salt water.  In the fall they stop over at molt sites en route to their wintering areas, where they molt and grow new feathers before they move on.	red-necked_grebe	RNGR			
363	48	Podiceps	nigricollis	Eared Grebe	Fairly common breeder east. Uncommon winter.	LC	The Eared Grebe is currently the most abundant species of grebe in North America and the world. The population is generally stable, although it is vulnerable because such a high percentage of the birds rely on so few lakes.  Protection of breeding grounds is equally important. Since colony locations change frequently, protection of wetlands that currently have a breeding colony isn't enough; protection must extend to all suitable habitat, no matter whether such habitat currently has a nesting colony.	The smallest grebe in Washington, the Eared Grebe is similar in appearance to the Horned Grebe, but is somewhat smaller and lighter-weight.  This grebe has a slightly upturned bill and a peak over the eye.  In the breeding season, its upperparts are dark, and its underparts are rufous.  The head and neck are black with a yellow spray of feathers radiating across the cheek.  (Outside of North America, this bird is known as the Black-necked Grebe.) Adults in non-breeding plumage are dark above, with a light, gray-white belly and dirty gray neck.  The top half of the head is dark, the bottom half light, with a white crescent at the ear.  Juvenile plumage is buff-gray with a white chin.		1	Eared Grebes breed in large freshwater lakes and reservoirs in eastern Washington in areas with open water and emergent vegetation.  They are quick to take advantage of temporary or man-made bodies of water. During migration and throughout the winter, they are often found in high-saline lakes and certain coastal bays.  Most of the population moves in winter to a few large hypersaline lakes in the West and Southwest (chiefly the Great Salt Lake and Mono Lake) to exploit the abundant brine shrimp and alkali flies that thrive in those waters.	Eared Grebes are commonly found nesting in large ponds and lakes at lower elevations in eastern Washington.  They can also be found on the east side of the Okanogan River.  In the Columbia Basin, colonies occur in suitable ponds and lakes up to the Ponderosa pine zone in Spokane County and throughout the Channeled Scablands.  They are not found breeding in the south-central part of the Columbia Basin.  They are found fairly commonly as migrants and occasionally as winter residents on open fresh water and less commonly on salt water in western Washington and the Columbia Basin.  When found wintering on the west side of Washington, they usually in ones or twos. However, staging locations such as Soap Lake and nesting colonies in Kahlotus Lake often have hundreds of individuals.	Eared Grebes are typically gregarious in nesting season, living in colonies that sometimes number thousands of individuals.  Like other grebes, they participate in elaborate courtship displays.  They experience vast fluctuations in weight and muscle mass throughout the year, going through a number of flightless periods.  In fact, it is possible that Eared Grebes spend a total of as much as ten months of the year unable to fly.	Insects and crustaceans make up the majority of the diet.  When Eared Grebes are on hypersaline lakes, brine shrimp are an important food source for them.		Eared Grebes nest in dense colonies. Both parents help build the well-concealed nest, which is a floating platform of weeds anchored to emergent vegetation in shallow water.  Both male and female birds incubate the three to four eggs for about 21 days.  As soon as all the young have hatched, the family leaves the nest.  Both adults feed and tend the young, sometimes splitting the workload about 10 days post-hatching, with each parent taking half of the brood.  The young are generally independent after 21 days.	Immediately after the breeding season, Eared Grebes migrate in huge numbers to a few large, hypersaline lakes (Great Salt Lake in Utah and Mono Lake in California) where they stop to molt and take advantage of abundant food.  They stay at these stopover points until food runs out, which can be months later.  As a result of this long stay, Eared Grebes are the latest North American migrant to move to their wintering grounds in Southern California, Mexico, and the Gulf Coast.  In March and early April, they begin their northward migration, often up the Pacific Coast, back to the breeding grounds	eared_grebe	EAGR			
364	48	Podilymbus	podiceps	Pied-billed Grebe	Common west.  Fairly common east.	LC	Pied-billed Grebes are still common and widespread, although there is evidence of recent declines, especially in the Northeast, where they have become extremely rare in some places for reasons unknown.  Habitat loss is the major threat, although Pied-billed Grebes will nest in created and restored wetlands.	A small grebe with a thick, relatively short bill, the Pied-billed Grebe is grayish-brown with lighter underparts.  Juveniles and adults have similar plumages, but during the breeding season adults have black at the throat and a whitish bill with a black band.		1	During the breeding season, Pied-billed Grebes are found at low elevations in ponds, lakes, and marshes.  Nesting areas typically have emergent vegetation to which these birds anchor their nests and open water in which they can forage.  During the winter they are found on both fresh and salt water, although they are much more likely to be found on fresh water.  More open water is used during winter, as the birds do not have nests to anchor at this time.  Pied-billed Grebes often use areas near rivers, typically bodies of still water. In migration Pied-billed Grebes can be found at higher elevations, even in mountain lakes.	With the widest distribution of any grebe found in the Western Hemisphere, Pied-billed Grebes are common in freshwater wetlands with marshy, emergent vegetation at lower elevations throughout the state, with the exception of the lower slopes of the eastern Cascades.  Although they have been known to nest even in city parks such as Seattle's Green Lake and Union Bay Natural Area, while breeding they are secretive and can be difficult to locate. In winter resident populations increase as local birds are joined by northern migratory birds, which begin arriving in western Washington in September and October. Eastern Washington migratory breeders are typically gone by December and return in late March or early April.	Pied-billed Grebes are less social than most species of grebes and are rarely found in flocks.  When disturbed, they dive headfirst under water, or they sink slowly into the water until only their heads are above water, like submarine periscopes.  The courtship displays of Pied-billed Grebes are less ritualized than those of other grebes, but still include much calling, sometimes in duet.	Insects, fish, and other aquatic creatures make up the bulk of the Pied-billed Grebe's diet.  The birds' heavy bills are adapted to crushing large crustaceans, but Pied-billed Grebes are also opportunistic feeders, preying on a wide variety of aquatic creatures including fish.  Like other grebes, Pied-billed Grebes will eat and feed their own feathers to their young.  It is thought that these feathers help them regurgitate bones and other non-digestible parts of their diet.	Common in King County in freshwater wetlands with marshy emergent vegetation below 1,000 feet elevation; a few may nest in lower foothills up to 1,500 feet. Uncommon in similar habitats in Island and Kitsap Counties. Absent from east slope of Cascades despite availability of some appropriate nesting habitat, particularly along Columbia River. Substantial nesting population on Seattle's Green Lake shows this species' tolerance of human presence.	Both parents build a nest in shallow water in a marsh.  Floating, or built up from the bottom, the nest is a dense mat of plant material anchored to emergent vegetation.  The nest can be approached from under water.  The female lays five to seven eggs that both parents help incubate for about 23 days.  When the nest is unattended for a prolonged period of time, the adults cover the nest with nesting material to protect it.  Both parents feed the young and may carry them around on their backs, even while swimming underwater.  Soon after hatching, the young can swim on their own.	Populations are found year round in the southern part of North America and along both coasts. Farther north, where the water freezes during winter, Pied-billed Grebes migrate. Migratory birds arrive to winter with the year-round populations during September and October.  Migratory populations depart for the breeding grounds in March or April, although many stay behind to breed in suitable habitat.	pied-billed_grebe	PBGR			
365	40	Poecile	atricapillus	Black-capped Chickadee	Common resident.	LC	Black-capped Chickadees are widespread and common throughout their range. They appear to be increasing in the eastern part of their range but have experienced slight, although non-significant, declines in the western part. Development and clear-cuts have resulted in more Black-capped Chickadee habitat than was available historically. Their nesting success in proximity to humans bodes well for their continued population growth. Forestry practices may limit nesting sites, as chickadees need existing cavities or soft, rotting wood in which to excavate.	Black-capped Chickadees are familiar backyard birds.  They have black caps, white cheeks, and black throats and are gray above with buff sides fading to white undersides. Males, females, and juveniles have the same plumage.		1	Black-capped Chickadees are found in a variety of habitats, but compared to the other chickadees in Washington, Black-cappeds are most likely to be found in deciduous or mixed woodlands. They are common in forest edges, parks, yards, wetlands, willow thickets, cottonwood groves, and disturbed areas.	Black-capped Chickadees are very common year round in the Puget Trough. They are also common and widespread in eastern Washington, especially along lowland streams. They are generally replaced by the other Washington chickadees at higher altitudes.  They are found higher up on the western slopes of the Cascades than on the eastern slopes. They are uncommon but increasing on the Olympic Peninsula, where they did not occur until recently. Black-cappeds can be found in developed areas and towns on the peninsula, but are not as common there as Chestnut-backed Chickadees.	During the breeding season, Black-capped Chickadees are territorial, but they form flocks in the winter. These winter flocks may include other species, but Black-cappeds are typically numerically dominant. Black-capped Chickadees often forage in birch or alders by hopping on twigs and branches and gleaning their surfaces for food. Often they hang upside-down to get at the undersides of branches and leaves, but they also hover, probe, and occasionally fly out to catch aerial prey. They readily come to seed and suet feeders. Black-capped chickadees cache food in Fall and retrieve it up to a month later.	Insects, spiders, berries, and seeds (especially sunflower seeds at feeders) make up the majority of their diet. Insects, spiders, and the eggs of both are common components of the winter diet. In winter, vegetable matter, including seeds and fruit, makes up about half of the diet, but that decreases to 10-20% during warmer months. During the summer, caterpillars become increasingly important. Black-capped Chickadees have also been seen scavenging fat from carrion.	Common in Puget Trough lowlands, extending into Cascades along river valleys; apparently isolated pocket in upper Green River drainage of King County. Common in central Kittitas County at moderate elevations, becoming rare westward toward crest. Uncommon and local in steppe zone, where limited to riparian vegetation. Flourishes in most settled areas throughout and near wetlands where hardwoods present.	Black-capped Chickadees are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds. They are cavity-nesters and use existing cavities including old woodpecker or other natural holes and occasionally nest boxes. Black-capped Chickadees will also excavate or enlarge their own cavities in rotten wood. Both sexes excavate, but only the female builds the nest, which starts with a foundation of moss and is lined with soft hair. The female incubates 6 to 8 eggs for 12 to 13 days. The male brings food while the female incubates.  In the first few days after the young hatch, the female broods the young almost continuously. As the young grow, the female joins the male in providing food. The young leave the nest at about 16 days but stay on the breeding territory for another 3-4 weeks before heading off on their own.	Black-capped Chickadees are considered permanent residents, but some may wander in the fall because of food shortages. Some northern populations undertake more regular migrations, triggered by these shortages.	black-capped_chickadee	BCCH			
366	40	Poecile	gambeli	Mountain Chickadee	Common resident east, uncommon west.	LC	There are two subspecies of Mountain Chickadee represented in Washington. One population inhabits the eastern Cascades and one population inhabits the Blue Mountains and northeast corner of the state. Data on trends in Washington and throughout the Mountain Chickadee's range are conflicting. According to Christmas Bird Count data, there has been an increase in winter numbers in the Northwest as a whole, but a decline in Washington. Breeding Bird Survey data show a slight, but non-significant increase in Washington during the breeding season, although the same survey has reported a survey-wide negative trend since 1980. More study is needed to understand the conservation status of the Mountain Chickadee in Washington, but habitat loss and fragmentation certainly may affect the population by eliminating corridors for dispersal and reducing food abundance.	Mountain Chickadees look similar to Black-capped Chickadees, with black caps, white cheeks, and black throats. They are gray above with light gray to buff sides and underparts. However, they have distinctive white lines above each eye, slightly longer bills, and are grayer underneath than Black-capped Chickadees. Males, females, and juveniles share the same plumage.		1	Mountain Chickadees are typically found in dry coniferous forests, especially Ponderosa and lodgepole pines. During the summer they can also be found in high-elevation aspen forests. In winter, they sometimes inhabit juniper stands and river bottoms.	Mountain Chickadees are common year round in dry forested habitats from the Cascade Crest east down to the edge of the shrub-steppe zone. West of the Cascades, they are common on the east slopes of Mt. Rainier, and they are occasionally seen in winter, but otherwise sightings in the western part of the state are rare.	During the breeding season Mountain Chickadees are territorial, but will join mixed-species flocks in winter, and tend to form pair bonds within the winter flocks. Chickadees forage by hopping on outer twigs and branches and gleaning the surfaces or probing into crevices for food. They often hang upside-down to get at the undersides of branches, cones, and needles. They will occasionally hover and will come to seed and suet feeders.  They store food in the fall and retrieve it later in winter.	Insects, spiders, the eggs of both, conifer seeds, and berries make up the majority of these omnivores' diets. During fall and winter, they rely heavily on conifer seeds. During the breeding season, insects, especially caterpillars, become more important.	In Kittitas County, common breeder in mid-elevation dry coniferous forests of Cascade flanks and Wenatchee Mountains, becoming fairly common at relatively high elevations but mostly absent from wet-forest zones. Rare and local at high elevations in northeast King County.	Mountain Chickadees are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds. They are cavity-nesters and use existing cavities, including nest boxes and old woodpecker holes or other natural cavities. The female builds a foundation of moss, lichen, and grass, and then adds a lining of soft hair. The female incubates 6 to 7 eggs for about 14 days. The male brings food while the female incubates, and for the first few days after the young hatch, as the female broods the young almost continuously. As the young grow, the female joins the male in providing food. The young leave the nest at about 21 days, but stay on the breeding territory for another 2 to 3 weeks before heading off on their own.	Mountain Chickadees are mostly permanent residents, although food shortages may induce some (especially juveniles) to move to lower elevations in winter.	mountain_chickadee	MOCH			
367	40	Poecile	hudsonica	Boreal Chickadee	Uncommon resident east.	LC	Boreal Chickadees inhabit a wide range across much of the far north. The remoteness of much of their range probably helps secure their future. This remoteness also makes reliable trend data difficult to obtain, although the population is considered stable. Their ability to use both mature and younger forests should help Boreal Chickadees withstand the effects of logging within their range. Boreal Chickadees in Washington probably comprise two different subspecies, with the birds in the northern Cascades from one population and the birds in the Kettle and Selkirk Mountains in eastern Washington from another population.	Boreal Chickadees look similar to Black-capped Chickadees, but have brownish-gray caps, less white on their cheeks, and smaller black throat-patches than Black-cappeds. Their sides are deep buff, and their backs are gray-brown. Males, females, and juveniles share the same plumage.		1	Boreal Chickadees are specialists of the far-northern or high-altitude boreal spruce-fir forest.  They use both young and mature forests, especially stands dominated by Engleman Spruce at elevations of 5,500 feet and above.	Boreal Chickadees are uncommon year round in high-elevation forests at the northern border of Washington in the North Cascades, Kettle, and Selkirk Mountains. Only Whatcom, Okanogan, Ferry, and Pend Oreille Counties have confirmed breeding-season records. They can be common in some areas including Freezeout Ridge, Roger Lake, and Long Swamp in Okanogan County.	During the breeding season Boreal Chickadees are territorial, but will join mixed-species flocks in winter. They forage by hopping on twigs and branches and gleaning the surfaces, probing into bark crevices, and occasionally hovering in front of branches. They often hang upside-down to get at the undersides of branches, cones, and needles. These chickadees store food in the fall and retrieve it later in winter, which may allow them to be resident at high altitudes and latitudes. This species has a reputation among birdwatchers as an elusive bird, as its range is remote and it is not as likely to call as often as other chickadees. Boreal Chickadees also forage more within the thick foliage than the other North American chickadees, and this makes them difficult to see.	Insects (including pupae and eggs), spiders, and seeds make up the majority of these omnivores' diets. During the breeding season they eat many caterpillars and other animal matter.		Boreal Chickadees are monogamous cavity-nesters, and females (often joined by males) may excavate their own or enlarge an existing nest cavity in soft rotten wood. They also will use an old woodpecker or other hole or even hollows in the earth beneath exposed tree roots. The nest is usually low, typically within 12 feet of the ground. The female builds a foundation of moss, lichen, and bark strips in the nest cavity, and then adds a lining of soft hair, feathers, and plant down. The female incubates 4 to 9 eggs for about 15 days. The male brings food while the female incubates and for the first few days after the young hatch, while the female broods the young almost continuously. As the young grow, the female joins the male in providing food. The young leave the nest at about 18 days, but stay on the breeding territory for another two weeks. The adults supplement their food while they learn to forage on their own.	Boreal Chickadees are one of only a few species of songbird that are year-round residents in boreal forest. They do undertake short-distance movements in some parts of their range, and irruptions occur in some years. Both of these movements are probably induced by lack of available food rather than by cold weather.	boreal_chickadee				
368	40	Poecile	rufescens	Chestnut-backed Chickadee	Common resident west. Fairly common east.	LC	When Northwest coniferous forests are clear-cut, hardwoods are often the first trees to grow in their place.  Thus, clear-cutting favors Black-capped Chickadees, which prefer deciduous vegetation, over the conifer-specialized Chestnut-backeds.  Although the Breeding Bird Survey has not detected significant trends in Washington, and Christmas Bird Count data reflect an increase throughout the Northwest, Chestnut-backed Chickadees have declined in the Seattle urban area. Audubon-Washington includes this species on its list of species-at-risk.	With their white cheeks and dark caps and throats,Chestnut-backed Chickadees look much like Black-capped Chickadees.  However the caps of Chestnut-backs are brown rather than black, and their backs, shoulders, and sides  are a deep chestnut color. They are also slightly smaller than Black-capped Chickadees. Males, females, and juveniles share similar plumage.		1	Chestnut-backed Chickadees favor dense, moist, coniferous forests.  They can be found from the lowlands up to the tree line, wherever there is a wet, closed-canopy forest.	Chestnut-backed Chickadees are permanent residents in wet coniferous forests throughout the state.  The majority of these habitats are in western Washington, where this bird is abundant, but some areas of eastern Washington provide suitable habitat as well.  Chestnut-backeds are probably the most abundant chickadee species west of the Puget Trough and are the only chickadee just to the north on Vancouver Island, BC.	During the breeding season Chestnut-backed Chickadees are territorial, but they join mixed-species flocks in winter.  They forage by hopping along twigs and branches and gleaning their surfaces or by probing into bark crevices for food.  They often hang upside-down to get at the undersides of branches and needles.  They readily come to seed and suet feeders.  Chestnut-backed Chickadees store food in the fall and retrieve it in winter.	Insects, spiders, conifer seeds, and berries make up most of these omnivores' diets.  They also readily eat suet and birdseed supplied by humans.	Common throughout Kitsap, Island, and King Counties in forested, rural, and suburban habitats, as well as in city parks and neighborhoods with mature conifer stands; scarce or absent in heavily developed urban areas. In Kittitas County, common above ponderosa pine zone in relatively moist coniferous forests at middle to high elevations in Cascades and Wenatchee Mountains, although uncommon and local east of Blewett Pass. Linked to coniferous habitat; declines as Black-capped Chickadee increases when conversion to hardwoods occurs.	Much of the nesting biology of Chestnut-backed Chickadees is not well known.  They are monogamous, and pairs may excavate their own nest cavity (in soft rotten wood) or may use an old woodpecker hole or other cavity, including artificial nest boxes.  The female builds a foundation of moss, lichen, and other material within the nest cavity, and then adds a lining of soft hair.  She incubates 6 to 7 eggs. Incubation length is not well known, but incubation times for most chickadee species are about two weeks.  Both members of the pair tend the young, but details of nestling time and time to independence are not well known.	During some winters Chestnut-backed Chickadees in colder climates may wander short distances, mostly as a result of food shortages. For the most part, however, they are permanent residents.	chestnut-backed_chickadee	CBCH			
369	49	Polioptila	caerulea	Blue-gray Gnatcatcher		LC		Casual in fall and winter (October'February) at low elevations in western Washington, one May'June record from Yakima County and one September record from Walla Walla (Walla Walla County).		1								blue-gray_gnatcatcher				
370	6	Polysticta	stelleri	Steller's Eider		VU		The smallest of the four eider species, Steller&#8217;s Eider breeds on tundra along the Arctic Ocean and Bering Sea in Siberia and Alaska, and winters on ice-free rocky seacoasts southward to the Kuril Islands, Kamchatka, the Aleutian Islands, and the Alaska Peninsula. With its body boldly patterned in black, white, and buffy, and its white head with green and black markings, the fancy male in breeding plumage is unmistakable. In all other plumages, however, Steller&#8217;s Eider looks rather like a small, plain, dark-brown dabbling duck. The best clues to its identity are its short neck and flat-topped head. Unlike the other eider species, it has no feathering on the bill.

This seaduck is a very rare vagrant down the coast on both sides of the Pacific. The first Washington record was of a bird that spent the winter of 1986&#8211;1987 at Port Townsend (Jefferson County). Another stayed for several days at the Walla Walla River mouth (Walla Walla County) in September 1995, providing Washington&#8217;s only other accepted record. Oregon has a single record, California three, and Steller&#8217;s Eider has been seen four times in British Columbia.

The Alaska breeding population of Steller&#8217;s Eider was listed as Threatened under the Endangered Species Act in 1997.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								stellers_eider				
371	42	Pooecetes	gramineus	Vesper Sparrow	Common summer resident east. Rare west.	LC	Two subspecies of Vesper Sparrows occur in Washington, divided by the Cascades.  The subspecies found west of the Cascades is rare and declining locally.  This population is in danger of extirpation in Washington due to conversion of prairies to residential areas, farmland, shrub fields, and forest.  The eastern Washington subspecies is common and widespread.  Breeding Bird Survey data have shown a statewide increase of 4.4% per year from 1966-1991.  Loss of habitat due to development is a potential threat to both subspecies, as are Brown-headed Cowbirds and nest destruction by farm equipment in agricultural areas.	The Vesper Sparrow is a chunky bird with a finely streaked breast and an unstreaked belly, a short to medium-length notched tail, and white outer tail feathers visible in flight.  It has a white eye-ring and a dark ear patch bordered in white along the lower and rear edges.  The small chestnut patches on its shoulders are not always visible.  Vesper Sparrows west of the Cascades have a pinkish hue and are smaller and browner than eastern Washington birds.  Vesper Sparrows are somewhat similar to both the Song and Savannah Sparrows, but are lighter than both.  Vesper Sparrows also lack the bold eyeline found in the Savannah Sparrow.  Vesper Sparrows are the only nesting sparrows of the open, low valleys of Washington that display white outer tail feathers in flight.  This characteristic, along with the chestnut patch occasionally visible on the bend of the wing, distinguishes it from other local sparrows.	Two pairs of slurred whistles, second pair with a higher pitch, followed by a series of short, descending trills. Similar to song sparrow, but with more leisurely opening notes	1	Vesper Sparrows are commonly found in dry grasslands, sagebrush, and agricultural fields at low to moderate elevations. They are uncommon in heavily grazed sagebrush country with little grass cover. These sparrows breed in native shrub-steppe habitats or in small patches of unplowed grass and shrubs near agricultural fields.	Most occur in the grass, sagebrush, and open Ponderosa pine areas of eastern Washington, but small populations occur in the open prairies around the southern end of Puget Sound and in grassy, weedy areas along salt water.  Western Washington populations may be found in Dungeness (Clallam County) (although this population may be extirpated), San Juan Island (San Juan County), the Chambers Lake area, Weir Prairie, and Scatter Creek Wildlife Recreation Area (Pierce and Thurston Counties).	Vesper Sparrows are often seen in loose flocks before fall migration.  They spend most of their time on the ground and take frequent dust baths.  Males sing from the highest perches in their territories--often a fence post, shrub, or tree limb.  During courtship, the male walks or runs along the ground with his wings raised and his tail spread widely, then periodically rises into the air to give a short flight-song.  The female has been known to protect the nest by dragging her leg or wing in a distraction display when threatened.  The call is distinctively different from those of the Song Sparrow and the Savannah Sparrow.	Vesper Sparrows eat mostly insects and the seeds of grasses and weeds.	Subspecies <i>P.g. confinis</i> common in steppe habitats with scattered shrubs throughout eastern Kittitas County. More likely to use degraded shrub-steppe and agricultural edge than Brewer's and Sage Sparrows. Also ranges higher than these, with records up to 3,600 feet on Umtanum Ridge at south edge of county and 5,000 feet near Colockum Pass. Avoids arid, rocky terrain adjacent to Columbia River. Absent in western counties, although remnant population of endangered race <i>P.g. affinis</i> hangs on in prairies of Pierce and Thurston Counties.	They build a bulky, loose, cup-like nest of grasses and rootlets on the ground in a small depression, often near the base of a grass clump, weed, or shrub.  The female typically lays 3-5 eggs in mid-May, and incubates them for 11-13 days. The young fledge in 7-12 days, and pairs commonly raise two broods per season.	Vesper Sparrows winter in the southern to east-central US south to the Gulf Coast and central Mexico. West of the Cascades, birds arrive in early April. The eastern Washington Two subspecies of Vesper Sparrows occur in Washington, divided by the Cascades.  The subspecies found west of the Cascades is rare and declining locally.  This population is in danger of extirpation in Washington due to conversion of prairies to residential areas, farmland, shrub fields, and forest.  The eastern Washington subspecies is common and widespread.  Breeding Bird Survey data have shown a statewide increase of 4.4% per year from 1966-1991.  Loss of habitat due to development is a potential threat to both subspecies, as are Brown-headed Vesper Sparrows winter in the southern to east-central US south to the Gulf Coast and central Mexico. West of the Cascades, birds arrive in early April. The eastern Washington subspecies arrives in mid-March. Both start to migrate south in mid-September.	vesper_sparrow	VESP			
372	54	Porzana	carolina	Sora	Fairly common summer. Rare winter west.	LC	Although the Sora is still widespread and common, loss of wetlands has led to population decline in many parts of its range.  Soras are legally hunted in many states.	The Sora has a stubby yellow bill, a black facial mask, and a black throat.  Its body is grayish-brown with white speckles.  Males and females have similar plumage, but females are slightly smaller.  In flight, their long wings have a pale trailing edge.		1	Sora habitat ranges from cattail marshes at lower elevations to moist sedge meadows in cooler, higher areas.  Soras also occur in brackish marshes, especially in winter and during migration.	Soras are a common migrant and summer resident in marshes and wet meadows both east and west of the Cascades.  They are rare in winter.	Soras spend much of their time hidden in dense emergent vegetation, but may occasionally be seen walking about in full view.  They forage by pecking at the surface of the ground or water with their chicken-like bills. Soras exhibit a variety of threat displays, and will aggressively defend breeding territories against other Soras and Virginia Rails.  During courtship, a male and female preen each other while bowing and turning toward and away from one another.  Soras give a loud, descending whinny call.	Soras eat seeds from smartweeds, sedges, and grasses.  In the spring, their diet includes a higher proportion of invertebrates such as insects and snails.	Uncommon and local at low to middle elevations on both sides of Cascades in open-edged freshwater marshes and wet meadows. Occurs in brackish marshes in Island County. Breeding confirmed at one site in Kitsap County after close of BBA period (Nancy Ladenberger, pers. comm.).	Both the male and female build the nest, which consists of dead cattails and grasses loosely woven into a basket.  The nest is suspended above the water, with a ramp made of plant material leading up to it.  The pair shares incubation of the 10-12 eggs.  The young leave the nest 3-4 days after hatching and are fed by both parents.	Soras begin to arrive at their breeding grounds in late March.  They gather in large wetlands with abundant food in August and early September before migrating south.  Peak fall migration lasts from September to early October.  Timing of migration, especially fall, may depend partly on the timing of frosts.  Soras winter from the southern United States to northern South America.	sora	SORA			
373	28	Progne	subis	Purple Martin	Fairly common but local summer west.	LC	Purple Martins have a long and close association with humans. Many Native American groups traditionally hung gourds in their villages for martins to nest in. Purple Martins were formerly common and widespread in western Washington, with reports of thousands lining power lines near Seattle's Green Lake in late summer. They are still common in the eastern United States, but Washington's population has declined dramatically in the past 50-60 years. This decline has been attributed to the presence of European Starlings and House Sparrows, both introduced cavity-nesters that compete with Purple Martins for limited nest boxes. Additional threats to the population include insecticides (50,000 were killed by pesticides in Brazil in 1989) and prolonged spring and summer cold spells when insects can't fly. The Purple Martin is listed as a candidate species by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife and is on the Washington Gap Analysis at-risk list. Conservationists have put up nest boxes that are resistant to House Sparrows and starlings, placing the nest boxes over water and plugging up entrances to keep invaders out until the martins arrive. Through the dedication of volunteers who closely monitor the species, the small population of Purple Martins in western Washington is slowly growing.	The Purple Martin is the largest swallow in North America and one of the largest in the world. Adult males are a solid, glossy, purplish-blue both above and below.  Females are colored similarly but less brightly above and have gray napes and foreheads. Below, females have brownish-gray breasts and light gray bellies. Juveniles look much like females, but are streaked underneath.  The tails of Purple Martins are slightly forked. In flight, European Starlings can be confused with Purple Martins, but the narrower wings, forked tails, and typical swallow flight of martins distinguish the two. The only other swallow in Washington with a dark chest and light belly like the female Purple Martin is the Cliff Swallow, but the Cliff Swallow is much smaller and has a square tail and more rounded wings.		1	Open land near water is the main Purple Martin nesting and foraging habitat in Washington State. Purple Martins can be found in developed areas, along waterfronts, and in fields, wetlands, and clearings.	Strictly a western Washington species, the Purple Martin is the state's least common swallow. Purple Martins can be found from mid-April to late August in localized areas, mostly over water. Small populations use nest boxes or pilings around the Puget Sound, for example on Vashon Island (King County), in Tacoma (Pierce County), on Shilshole Bay and the Duwamish River in Seattle (King County), at Port Townsend (Jefferson County), and on Camano Island (Island County). They also can be found nesting in natural cavities on Fort Lewis (Pierce County) and on San Juan Island (San Juan County). Others can be found along the Columbia Estuary (Pacific County).	Purple Martins forage almost entirely in flight, both low over water and quite high. In bad weather they occasionally forage on the ground.	Although claims of Purple Martins eating 2,000 mosquitoes a day have not been substantiated, Purple Martins do eat flying insects almost exclusively.	Rare and declining for several decades due to nest-site competition from European Starling. Recent installation of nest boxes and gourds over water has led to resurgence. Now locally common along Puget Sound shoreline, including confirmed BBA records at Seabeck and Liberty Bay (Kitsap County), Shilshole Bay and several sites on Vashon Island (King County), and English Boom on Camano Island (Island County). Has continued to spread to new nesting locations throughout coastal areas beyond close of atlas period. Nests mostly over salt water, but recent evidence suggests revival of historic breeding colony on Lake Sammamish (King County).	Purple Martins form monogamous pairs that last through the nesting season, but not from season to season. They are cavity nesters that historically nested in tree cavities, old woodpecker holes, rotted pilings, and other natural cavities. Now most Purple Martins nest in man-made nest boxes. Eastern colonial populations are well known for nesting in large group nest boxes ('apartment buildings'), but Washington's martins will not use these group boxes and prefer to nest singly in boxes over water. Within the nest box, both members of the pair build a nest cup of leaves, grass, and twigs, with mud at the base of the entrance hole. The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 15 to 18 days, possibly with some incubation by the male, and both members of the pair feed the young. The young leave the nest at 28 to 29 days, and the parents continue to feed them for 5 to 7 more days.  Some young return to the nest at night.	Purple Martins are long-distance migrants. Birds gather in large pre-migratory groups in late summer before heading to South America's Amazon Basin. They return to Washington mid-April to May.	purple_martin	PUMA			
374	41	Protonotaria	citrea	Prothonotary Warbler		LC		Size and structure&#8212;large, full-bodied, long-billed&#8212;make the Prothonotary Warbler an unlikely candidate for confusion with other warbler species. It is also distinctive in plumage, with bright-yellow head and breast, greenish-yellow back, and bluish wings. When spread, the bluish upperside of the tail shows large white spots. The underside of the tail is mostly white, extending onto the undertail coverts. The Blue-winged Warbler is somewhat similar in coloration but has a dark line through the eye and prominent white wingbars, in addition to being considerably smaller and more slender.

The Prothonotary Warbler inhabits wet woodlands and stream corridors, nesting mostly in tree cavities, in the lower Midwest, Middle Atlantic states, and Southeast. Its main wintering grounds extend from Honduras to Columbia and Venezuela. It migrates directly across the Gulf of Mexico or along the Gulf coastal lowlands. Prothonotary Warbler is an accidental vagrant in the Pacific Northwest, with 80 percent of the small number of records coming in fall. Washington&#8217;s two accepted records are from Richland (Benton County) on 5 September 1970 and Burbank (Walla Walla County) on 20&#8211;21 October 2005. British Columbia has one record (November) as does Idaho (September). Five of Oregon&#8217;s seven records fall between mid-August and mid-November; the other two are from May&#8211;June.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								prothonotary_warbler				
375	51	Prunella	montanella	Siberian Accentor		LC		One record, at Indian Island (Jefferson County) in October 1983.		1								siberian_accentor				
376	2	Psaltriparus	minimus	Bushtit	Common resident west. Uncommon east.	LC	In Washington, Bushtits were formerly limited to the central Puget Sound area, but as conifer forests have been converted into residential areas full of shrubby habitat, their range has expanded northward and eastward. There are small populations east of the Cascades. These populations may have moved across the mountains via areas with extensive clear-cutting which created a corridor of shrubby habitat across the Cascade Crest, or they may have come from populations farther south. The first Bushtits in Yakima County were recorded in 1947, but the first nest in Kittitas County was not recorded until 1989. Given this expansion and adaptability to suburban environments, it is surprising to note that the Breeding Bird Survey has recorded a significant decline of Bushtits in Washington since 1966. Disturbance may be a factor, as Bushtits will abandon their nests in the early stages of building, although they seem to tolerate disturbance later in the nesting cycle. An increase in the crow population may also be a factor, as they often rip up Bushtits' nests in urban areas.	The Bushtit is a tiny, gray bird with a long tail. It has a brownish wash on its forehead and a tiny, thin bill. Adult females have white eyes. Adult males and juveniles have dark eyes.		1	Bushtits inhabit mixed coniferous and deciduous areas with shrubby growth. They commonly use suburban areas and city parks, as well as young coniferous forests with an open canopy. They are mostly found west of the Cascades. In eastern Washington, they can be found in developed areas, irrigated pastures, orchards, wetlands, and other shrubby areas, although their range is very limited.	Bushtits are common in appropriate habitat, especially suburban areas, throughout the Puget Trough, west to Ocean Shores and south to Vancouver, Washington. East of the Cascades, there are isolated populations of Bushtits along the Columbia River in Klickitat County, near Toppenish in Yakima County, and near Cle Elum in Kittitas County.	Highly social birds, Bushtits are usually found in flocks of 40 individuals or more. When flying from shrub to shrub, they often fly in a straggling line. In cold weather, the group may huddle together at communal roosts to stay warm. They glean food from leaves and twigs, often hanging upside-down to get at the undersides of leaves.	Bushtits eat predominantly tiny insects and spiders. They also eat some berries and seeds, and readily come to suet feeders.	Common in shrubby growth, open woodlands, and residential areas throughout Puget Trough lowlands, becoming uncommon and local at moderate elevation in Cascade foothills and river valleys. In Kittitas County, uncommon and local during BBA period in vicinity of Yakima River near Cle Elum and at mouth of Umtanum Creek, with nesting first discovered in 1989 (Opperman 1992). Kittitas County populations may represent extension of population farther south in Yakima/Columbia River drainage <i>(P.m. minimus</i>; Stepniewski 1999), or may instead have dispersed east over lower Cascade passes from Puget Sound populations <i>(P.m. saturatus).</i>	There is some evidence of communal nesting by Bushtits, but it is limited to southeastern Arizona. Helpers at the nest are usually adult males. During nesting season, flocks break up, and pairs establish loose territories, although they appear to tolerate other Bushtits within their territories. Both members of the pair help build the nest. The nest is an impressive, woven, hanging basket with a hole high up on the side of the nest and a passageway to the nest chamber at the bottom. It can be up to a foot long, and is generally built of spider webs, moss, lichen, and other plant material. Inside, the nest is lined with plant down, fur, and feathers. If the pair is disturbed during the early stages of nest-building, they will abandon the nest and find a new location, sometimes finding a new mate as well. Both parents incubate the 4-10 eggs for 12-13 days, sometimes at the same time. Both brood the young and bring them food until shortly after they leave the nest at about 18 days. They generally raise two broods a year.	Bushtits are mostly permanent residents, although they may move from mountainous areas to lower elevations in winter.	bushtit	BUSH			
377	50	Pterodroma	cookii	Cook's Petrel		VU		One bird found dead on Pacific beach in December 1995.		1								cooks_petrel				
378	50	Pterodroma	inexpectata	Mottled Petrel		NT		Probably regular far offshore in winter, though seldom seen by birders. Four on Westport (Grays Harbor County) pelagic trip in February 1997; numerous individuals brought within sight of Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) jetty during storm in late November 2000. Several records of birds found dead on Pacific beaches, February to July.		1								mottled_petrel				
379	50	Pterodroma	ultima	Murphy's Petrel		NT		Several records between April and September, the earliest in 1992'mostly far offshore in the Pacific.		1								murphys_petrel				
380	5	Ptychoramphus	aleuticus	Cassin's Auklet	Fairly common pelagic. Breeder.	NT	Cassin's Auklets can be found from Alaska to Mexico. They are abundant in many parts of their range, but in others they have experienced significant declines. With an estimated total of over 88,000 birds, the Cassin's Auklet is the most numerous breeding seabird (aside from the gulls) in Washington. They make up 34% of all breeding seabirds in the state, yet they breed on only six islands. Numbers fluctuate considerably from year to year, in response to changes in food supply and to climatic events such as El Niño. Although they are abundant, on their nesting colonies Cassin's Auklets are vulnerable to disturbance from humans and introduced predators. Oil contamination is another potential threat on the breeding colonies and on feeding grounds at sea. Since nesting colonies in Washington are protected as wildlife refuges, human disturbance is minimized. However with colonies concentrated on a small number of islands, habitat destruction or degradation on even one of those islands could significantly affect the population in Washington.	A small, chunky bird with a big head and a short tail, the Cassin's Auklet is grayish-colored overall, darker above than below. A white spot above each eye is a distinctive field mark.		1	Cassin's Auklet is one of the most widespread alcids in the northern Pacific. During the breeding season, they come inland and nest on islands, although during this time many are still found far offshore. In the non-breeding season, they are found in the open ocean, at the outer edge of the continental shelf. They use any kind of island for nesting, as long as mammalian predators are absent. In Washington, they prefer islands with shrubby habitat and cliffs.	There are eight known nesting locations in Washington State (on Mid-Bodelteh Island, East Bodelteh Island, Carroll Island, Jagged Island, Alexander Island, and Dhuoyautzachtahl, all in Clallam and Jefferson Counties), but there probably are some additional nesting sites. The largest colony in Washington is on Alexander Island, where approximately 55,000 Cassin's Auklets nest.  Feeding far offshore and visiting their colonies at night, Cassin's Auklets are seldom seen near shore. They are fairly common year round offshore, and thus are best seen by boat. A few sometimes venture into Puget Sound where they can be seen from shore.	Sociable in all seasons, Cassin's Auklets feed in flocks and nest in large colonies. They are nocturnal at the colonies, entering and leaving their nesting burrows at night. They feed by day and by night, and forage by swimming underwater, using their wings for propulsion. They can dive more than 120 feet below the surface.	Small fish and small ocean-going crustaceans (krill) make up most of the Cassin's Auklet's diet. During the breeding season, they develop a pouch in their throats that is used to store food for the young.		Nest burrows are located in island colonies. When there is sufficient soil cover, Cassin's Auklets dig burrows in the ground. When there is not enough soil, they construct burrows in rock crevices, piles of debris, cracks under buildings, caves, and even under trees. Both members of a pair build the burrow, to which little or no nest material is added. A pair uses the same burrow year after year. The female lays one egg, and both parents incubate for about 5-1/2 weeks (can be up to 8 weeks). Both parents care for the chick until it fledges, 6-7 weeks after hatching. When the chick fledges, it goes straight to the water, able to swim and dive immediately.	Cassin's Auklets are non-migratory.	cassins_auklet				
381	50	Puffinus	bulleri	Buller's Shearwater	Fairly common fall pelagic.	VU	Colonies on some islands were nearly wiped out by feral pigs near the beginning of the 20th Century. The pigs were eradicated in 1936, and since then the population has rebounded to a total population of more than two million. This population growth has resulted in a range expansion into the northern Pacific. The first record of a Buller's Shearwater in southeastern Alaska was in 1974, and they have been regular fall visitors off the Washington coast since the 1970s.	Other than the Pink-footed Shearwater, the Buller's Shearwater is the only large, white-bellied shearwater found off the Pacific Coast. Its undersides are entirely white, cleanly edged in dark gray. Its upperparts are slate-gray with bold, black accents. On the water, its clean, white flanks, white throat and chin, and gray bill are visible. The head is divided cleanly into a gray-black upper half and a white lower half, divided at the eye. In flight, the Buller's Shearwater is more graceful than other shearwaters, flapping less and gliding more.		1	The Buller's Shearwater is found in open ocean, concentrated at areas of upwellings where warm and cool water currents meet, and deep-ocean water, rich with nutrients, is brought to the surface. The Buller's Shearwater rarely comes close to the shore. Its nesting habitat is on islands with soil suitable for burrowing or crevices among rocky cliffs.	As with the other shearwaters in Washington, the Buller's Shearwater is most easily seen on boat trips. It rarely comes close to shore, and is most common in September. They are known to concentrate at an area of upwelling off the Olympic Peninsula.	When taking off from the nesting colony, the Buller's Shearwater may climb into trees to take flight more easily. Unlike other species of shearwaters, the Buller's Shearwater is seldom seen feeding on offal from fishing vessels.	The diet of the Buller's Shearwater is not well known, but most likely includes crustaceans, fish, and squid. Food is taken at or just below the water's surface. When foraging in flight, the shearwater drops down, and plunges into the water from just above the surface. It swims with its head submerged, sometimes up-ended much like a dabbling duck. The Buller's Shearwater rarely dives under water.		Buller's Shearwaters nest only on the Poor Knights Islands, located off North Island, New Zealand. Adults arrive at the island in September and nest in dense colonies, which are active mostly at night. The nest is built in a burrow under a tree root or rock, in a cave, or in a rock crevice. Both parents help build the burrow and nest chamber, which is lined with leaves, twigs, and pebbles. Some have been known to nest in burial caves and may use human bones as nest material. The female lays one egg in late November, and both parents incubate for over 7 weeks. Both parents regurgitate food for the chick. About 14 weeks after hatching, generally in May, the young shearwater leaves the colony and heads to sea.	Trans-equatorial migrants, Buller's Shearwaters head north to sub-arctic waters in April and May. They can be seen off the Pacific Coast of North America from June through November, although they are most common in September.	bullers_shearwater				
382	50	Puffinus	carneipes	Flesh-footed Shearwater	Rare pelagic.	LC	Flesh-footed and Pink-footed Shearwaters are closely related, and some authorities consider them to be the same species.  There are two main populations of Flesh-footed Shearwaters, those nesting in western Australia and those nesting in New Zealand. The birds that nest in New Zealand winter in the North Pacific.	Closely related to the Pink-footed Shearwater, the Flesh-footed Shearwater is solid, dark black-brown in color, with a pinkish beak and feet. The undersides of the wings may appear silver in flight.		1	In the non-breeding season, the Flesh-footed Shearwater inhabits the open ocean. It prefers to keep to warm waters, not commonly venturing as far north as many other shearwater species found off the coast of Washington. Pink-footed Shearwaters nest on islands with soil suitable for digging burrows for nests.	Flesh-footed Shearwaters are found uncommonly off the coast of Washington from May to October, almost always near shrimp trawlers. The best way to see them is on a boat trip. Typically only one or two birds are seen at a time, but flocks of up to 60 have been seen off Vancouver Island (British Columbia).	Although they seldom come close to the boats, they readily follow commercial fishing vessels and will dive after offal thrown overboard.	The diet of the Pink-footed Shearwater consists of fish, squid, and crustaceans		Colony nesters, Flesh-footed Shearwaters nest on islands off the coast of Australia and New Zealand. They are active on the colonies mostly at night. They nest in underground burrows that may be over four feet long. The female lays a single egg in December, and both parents incubate. Once the egg hatches, both parents feed the chick, which leaves the island and heads to sea in April or May.	Like all shearwaters, the Flesh-footed Shearwater breeds in the Southern Hemisphere's summer, from September through April. It spends the non-breeding season in the Northern Hemisphere from May to September.	flesh-footed_shearwater				
383	50	Puffinus	creatopus	Pink-footed Shearwater	Common pelagic.	VU	Although the Pink-footed Shearwater population is currently strong, it is declining on some nesting islands due to introduced predators. The Pink-footed and Flesh-footed Shearwaters are closely related, and some authorities consider them to be the same species.	The largest of the shearwaters commonly seen off the Pacific Coast, the Pink-footed Shearwater is the only large, white-bellied shearwater found in our area besides the Buller's Shearwater. Stocky, with broad wings, the Pink-footed Shearwater has a dark, brown-gray head, uniform dark, gray-brown upperparts, and a pink bill and feet. The underside of the wings is white-mottled-with-dark, and the belly is white. On the water, the bird appears mostly brownish-gray with some white on its flanks.		1	The Pink-footed Shearwater is found in the open ocean, well offshore in the waters over the continental shelf. Its nesting habitat is on islands off Chile, with soil suitable for digging nest burrows.	Pink-footed Shearwaters are commonly seen on boat trips from May to October. They are more often spotted in summer and fall than in spring. While rarely seen from land, they can sometimes be spotted from the north jetty at the mouth of the Columbia River (Pacific County).	Found alone or in groups, often with other species of shearwaters, the Pink-footed Shearwater flies low over the sea with stiff-winged glides intermixed with quick wing-beats. It often tilts on its side, one wing almost slicing the water's surface. It plunges into the water after prey, or dives from the surface while swimming, and swims under water using its wings to propel itself.	The diet of the Pink-footed Shearwater is not well known, but is mostly likely fish, squid, and possibly crustaceans. Pink-footed Shearwaters also follow fishing boats and feed on the offal from the boats.		Colony nesters, Pink-footed Shearwaters nest only on islands far off the coast of Chile. They are active on the colonies mostly at night. They nest in underground burrows that may be over four feet long. The female lays a single egg in December, and both parents incubate. Once the egg hatches, both parents feed the chick, which leaves the island and heads to sea in April or May.	In April or May, after the breeding season, the population migrates as far north as southeastern Alaska.	pink-footed_shearwater				
384	50	Puffinus	gravis	Greater Shearwater		LC		The first state record occurred on a pelagic trip off Westport on 22 August 2002.		1								greater_shearwater				
385	50	Puffinus	griseus	Sooty Shearwater	Common pelagic, warmer winter months.	NT	Along with the Short-tailed Shearwater, the Sooty Shearwater is one of the most numerous shearwaters. The total population is probably in the tens of millions. In recent years however, numbers off parts of the West Coast have declined significantly. It is speculated that this decline may be as a result of the rise in sea surface temperatures.	The Sooty Shearwater has a dark body with silvery underwings. It is similar in appearance to the Short-tailed Shearwater. Consult a field guide to distinguish between the two.		1	Sooty Shearwaters are widespread at sea and concentrate around upwellings, where cold and warm water masses meet, and over the continental shelf in cooler waters. They may come close to shore where the water is deep. They breed in the far Southern Hemisphere, on islands around Australia, New Zealand, and southern South America, where there is diggable soil for burrows, or rock crevices in which to situate nests.	Found in open ocean and coastal regions, the Sooty Shearwater is the most abundant shearwater, with huge flocks often numbering in the thousands, especially in the fall. It is the only shearwater that can be seen from shore along the Washington Coast.   In spring, summer, and fall, Sooty Shearwaters are very common along the outer coast, although they are very rare in the winter. Offshore birding trips are the best way to see Sooty Shearwaters, but during the fall migration or following an onshore storm, they can be seen from shore off the north jetty at the mouth of the Columbia River (Pacific County) or in the Strait of Juan de Fuca.	In calm weather, Sooty Shearwaters fly low over the ocean's surface with quick, stiff wing-beats. On windy days, they glide over the waves. They are often found in groups of hundreds or thousands, flying in long lines or grouped tightly together on the water. They plunge into the water from a few feet above the surface and swim under water, using their wings to propel themselves. They also dive from the surface, taking prey at surface level, or just below. They sometimes feed near dolphins, whales, or other seabirds.	In the northern Pacific, Sooty Shearwaters feed mostly on small fish, but they also eat crustaceans, shrimp, squid, and jellyfish.		A colony nester, the Sooty Shearwater nests in the far Southern Hemisphere. Birds do not breed until they are 5-9 years old. The breeding season lasts from September to May, and during this time, the birds are most active in the colonies at night. The nest is placed in a burrow dug in the soil by both parents. Alternatively, the nest is built in a natural rock crevice. The burrow can be up to ten feet long with a loose nest of grass and leaves at the end of it. Both parents incubate the single egg for 7-8 weeks. Once the egg hatches, both parents feed the young for almost 14 weeks, after which it leaves the island and heads out to sea.	While some non-breeders are present off the Pacific Coast in all seasons, the breeding adults head north in April and May, on their way to the north Pacific where they spend the non-breeding season. The migration occurs in waves of age classes, with the sub-adults moving in the first wave, breeding adults next, and finally the non-breeding adults and fledglings last.	sooty_shearwater				
386	50	Puffinus	pacificus	Wedge-tailed Shearwater		LC		One bird found dead on Pacific beach in September 1999.		1								wedge-tailed_shearwater				
387	50	Puffinus	puffinus	Manx Shearwater		LC		First records at Westport and Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County), September'October of 1990 and 1992. Increasingly reported since then from March to October, mostly well offshore in Pacific Ocean but also near outer coastline, in Strait of Juan de Fuca, and even in Puget Sound.		1								manx_shearwater				
388	50	Puffinus	tenuirostris	Short-tailed Shearwater	Uncommon fall and winter pelagic.	LC	The status of the Short-tailed Shearwater is difficult to determine, as it can be difficult to distinguish from the Sooty Shearwater.  Total numbers are estimated at more than 20 million.	The Short-tailed Shearwater is similar in appearance to the Sooty Shearwater, although its bill is smaller, its head is rounder, and its wings are narrower and more angled. Check a field guide for accurate identification.		1	The breeding habitat of the Short-tailed Shearwater is on islands, and in some cases mainland areas, where grass and shrubs cover soil soft enough to allow the excavation of a burrow. During the non-breeding season, the Short-tailed Shearwater spends its time on the open ocean, concentrating over upwellings at the edge of the continental shelf in cool water.	Where and When to Find in Washington  
Reports vary from one year to the next, but Short-tailed Shearwaters are most often seen in the late summer and fall, although they are relatively uncommon. They are very rare in spring and winter. The best way to see Short-tailed Shearwaters is from a boat. During the fall migration or following an onshore storm, they can sometimes be seen in the Strait of Juan de Fuca.	Short-tailed Shearwaters forage mostly by diving from a swimming position on the surface of the water, or by plunging from a few feet above the water's surface. They swim under water by propelling themselves with their wings, and may dive as deep as 60 feet below the surface. They can sometimes be found foraging in association with whales or dolphins.	Their diet consists of fish, crustaceans, and squid.		Short-tailed Shearwaters first breed at 5-8 years of age. Colony nesters, Short-tailed Shearwaters typically locate their colonies on islands off southeastern Australia, but will also use mainland areas. The breeding season is from September to April. They are most active in the colonies at night. Both parents help dig a burrow in the soil. At the end of the burrow is a nest chamber that may be lined with grass. The female lays one egg, and both parents incubate for 7-8 weeks. Both feed the young by regurgitation. After 11-15 weeks, the chick leaves the nesting colony and heads to sea.	During summer in the Northern Hemisphere, Short-tailed Shearwaters can be found as far north as Alaska, the Bering Strait, and beyond. In April and May, they can be found off the Washington coast. In August and September, they can be seen heading south to breed. Non-breeders may stay in the Northern Hemisphere all year.	short-tailed_shearwater				
389	68	Pyrocephalus	rubinus	Vermilion Flycatcher		LC		Three fall-winter records, all from western Washington lowlands.		1								vermilion_flycatcher				
390	30	Quiscalus	mexicanus	Great-tailed Grackle		LC		Abundant and highly visible year round in a variety of open, rural and urban landscapes in Mexico, Central America, and coastal northern South America, the Great-tailed Grackle has been extending its range northward and westward for the last hundred years and is now resident in the United States from Texas to Iowa and California. It is annual, and has nested, in Oregon, and is a rare resident breeder in southern Idaho. Washington has four accepted records (earliest 1987) and there are at least two records from British Columbia (earliest 1979).

The adult male is glossy black with a yellow eye and a bluish-purple sheen on the head and back. The adult female, considerably smaller, is brown with buffy underparts and a pale eye. Both sexes have a keel-shaped tail, which is especially long in the male. The male somewhat resembles a Common Grackle but is much larger and longer-billed, with a purplish rather than a bronzy sheen on the back. The tail is also proportionally longer&#8212;as long as the body, or even longer. The female looks a bit like the female Brewer&#8217;s Blackbird but is much larger, longer-billed and longer-tailed, with a pale rather than a dark eye.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								great-tailed_grackle				
391	30	Quiscalus	quiscula	Common Grackle		LC		A widespread resident east of the Rockies in southern Canada and the United States, the Common Grackle has been expanding its range westward in recent decades. It now nests in eastern Idaho and is annual in Oregon. The first Washington record was from Seattle (King County) in 1965. Of the total of twelve accepted records in the state, eight are from the Columbia Plateau, three are from the Puget Trough lowlands, and one is from the outer coast. Three-quarters of the records have occurred in spring and summer (March&#8211;August) and the remainder in fall and winter (October&#8211;January). Common Grackle nests in the lowlands of northeastern British Columbia, east of the continental divide, but is very rare to casual elsewhere in the province.

Both sexes are all-black with a yellow eye and a bluish sheen on the head, and have keel-shaped tails; females are somewhat smaller. The subspecies that occurs in the Northwest shows a bronzy sheen on the back and breast (less pronounced in the female). The most likely confusion species in Washington is the male Brewer&#8217;s Blackbird, which, however, is considerably smaller with a thinner bill; a much shorter, keel-less tail; and a greenish sheen on the back. See also Great-tailed Grackle (an even rarer vagrant in Washington than Common Grackle) and Rusty Blackbird, a rare winter visitor in the state.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								common_grackle				
392	54	Rallus	limicola	Virginia Rail	Fairly common resident.	LC	The Virginia Rail is considered a game bird in much of North America, but is seldom hunted.  Loss of wetland habitat has led to population decline in some areas, but numbers are thought to be relatively stable.	The Virginia Rail is a medium-sized bird of both fresh and salt water marshes. It has a long, slightly decurved bill and a short, upturned tail.  The body, legs, and bill are reddish in color, and the cheeks are gray.  The flanks are banded black and white.  Juveniles are blackish-brown above with black or gray mottled underparts.		1	Virginia Rails are found primarily in freshwater marshes and less often in brackish marshes.  They prefer a mixture of emergent vegetation and flooded openings where insects are abundant.  In winter, Virginia Rails often move to salt marshes.  However large numbers remain in fresh water marshes in winter. They are often associated with cattails.	In western Washington, breeding birds are found in lower-elevation fresh water marshes and some brackish marshes along the Puget Trough west to Ocean Shores.  In eastern Washington, they occur throughout the Columbia Basin, Palouse, and Okanogan Valley, and north along large river valleys.  Virginia Rails winter in both western and eastern Washington, but the numbers may vary year to year due to cold weather.  The Union Bay Natural Area/Montlake Fill (King County) and North Creek Park in Mill Creek (Snohomish County) are good places to look for them.	Virginia Rails are very secretive birds that are more likely to be heard than seen. They are most active and visible at dawn and dusk. The long bill is used to probe mud and shallow water for prey. Virginia Rails have a number of vocalizations that function as communication between mates and in territorial disputes.  The male performs a courtship display, bowing and running around the female with his wings raised.  Both sexes vigorously defend the nest and the young.	Virginia Rails feed on a variety of aquatic insects such as beetles and flies.  They also eat slugs, snails, earthworms, and small fish.  Compared to Soras, Virginia Rails consume more animal food, but Virginia Rails will eat aquatic plants and seeds, especially in the fall and winter.	Fairly common in Puget Trough up to low elevations of Cascade foothills. Uncommon and local in Kittitas County, mostly near Yakima River. Inhabits freshwater marshes with emergent vegetation and open edges, less commonly brackish marshes.	Both sexes build the well-concealed nest, adding material as eggs are being laid and incubated.  The nest is a loosely woven basket made of marsh plants with a living plant canopy.  Virginia Rails also build several dummy nests near the active nest.  The female lays 5-13 eggs, and both sexes incubate.  Young develop very quickly and leave the nest 3-4 days after hatching.  They can forage independently within 7 days of hatching.  Both parents continue to defend the young after they leave the nest.	Most populations in North America are migratory, although some populations in the West are permanent residents.  Spring migrants may arrive as early as late March.  Virginia Rails migrate from mid-August through October.  Many birds winter west of the Cascades, and a few may occasionally attempt to winter in eastern Washington.	virginia_rail	VIRA			
393	55	Recurvirostra	americana	American Avocet	Fairly common summer east. Rare west.	LC	Wetland losses have led to population declines from historic levels.  Selenium contamination of wetlands due to irrigation drain water has been associated with embryo deformities and decreased hatching of young.  Wetland conservation and mitigation efforts are under way, and populations are now thought to be stable or increasing.	The American Avocet is a large shorebird with a bold black and white pattern on its back, long bluish legs, and a long, thin, upwardly curved bill.  The bill of the female is shorter and slightly more upturned than that of the male.  The underparts of males and females are white, and breeding adults have buffy-orange plumage on the head and neck. Heads and necks are gray to whitish in non-breeding adults (September to February) and pale pinkish-orange in juveniles.		1	American Avocets occupy shallow freshwater habitat in open country.  They typically feed in open water 10-20 centimeters deep, but they also swim regularly in water too deep for wading.  Highly productive alkaline ponds and lakes are ideal for foraging.	American Avocets are locally common in freshwater ponds and wetlands of the Columbia Basin in central Washington.  Recently a few pairs have nested, or attempted to nest, in western Washington, in the lowlands of Clark County and at Crockett Lake on Whidbey Island.	American Avocets often forage by sweeping their long bills from side to side with the tip of the bill, which is extremely sensitive to touch, barely submerged in water.  They also feed visually by capturing prey from the surface of mud or water, by plunging their heads into water, and by snatching insects from the air.  American Avocets are semi-colonial breeders. They remain monogamous within a breeding season. They defend their young vigorously with an array of alarm calls and distraction displays, and will also dive-bomb predators if eggs or young are directly threatened.	Small crustaceans and insects make up the majority of their diet.  American Avocets also occasionally eat small fish and seeds.	Locally common in freshwater ponds and wetlands of Columbia Plateau but not known to nest in Kittitas County. Single confirmed BBA record in our area: pair with young at Crockett Lake on Whidbey Island in 2000. Single pairs failed to nest successfully at same location in 2002 and 2004, after close of atlas period.	Most pairing takes place before or during migration.  Both sexes select the nest site, on bare or sparsely vegetated open ground near water, or islands when available. Either sex may scrape out the nest depression while the other one watches.  The pair adds lining such as grass, pebbles, and feathers throughout incubation. The female usually lays four eggs, and both sexes incubate.  Another female will sometimes lay 1-4 additional eggs in the same nest, however these 'dump nests' rarely succeed. Chicks are precocial and able to leave the nest within 1-2 hours of hatching. The young form flocks with other fledglings and adults when leaving the nesting area after breeding season.  American Avocets normally raise one brood per season.	Migrants typically arrive on Washington breeding grounds by early April and leave by mid-September. They are rare west of the Cascades. American Avocets winter on the coasts of the southern United States and western Mexico.	american_avocet				
394	56	Regulus	calendula	Ruby-crowned Kinglet	Common migrant winter west. Fairly common breeder.	LC	Ruby-crowned Kinglets are widespread and common.  Their populations fluctuate because of winter die-offs in particularly cold years, but the Breeding Bird Survey has not detected any significant, long-term population changes in Washington.  The Ruby-crowned Kinglet's ability to use a variety of habitats outside of the breeding season has allowed it to adapt to the changing landscape, although logging and uncontrolled wildfires have shrunk its breeding range.	Ruby-crowned Kinglets are tiny, active, olive-green to gray songbirds.  Their wings are dark, with two white wing-bars.  There is a black smudge below the second wing-bar, which is a field mark useful in distinguishing a Ruby-crowned Kinglet from the similar-appearing Hutton's Vireo.  Ruby-crowned Kinglets have bold, incomplete white eye-rings.  Their legs are black and their feet, yellow.  They are slightly larger than the closely related Golden-crowned Kinglet and lack that species' black and white head stripes.  Male Ruby-crowned Kinglets have bright red crests (that can vary in color to orange), which can be raised when the bird is excited but which are more often completely hidden.  Females look like males but lack the red crest.		1	Ruby-crowned Kinglets breed in dry, open, coniferous and mixed forests at high elevations, typically in small forest openings or wetlands within these forest zones.  They nest in higher, drier habitats than Golden-crowned Kinglets.  During migration and in winter, they come down into the lowlands and can be found in a wide variety of forest and shrub habitats.	Ruby-crowned Kinglets breed in the eastern Cascades and at very high elevations just west of the Cascade crest (e.g. on Mt. Rainier.)  They also breed in the Olympics. They are common in winter in the western Washington lowlands as far as the outer coast, but are uncommon in winter in eastern Washington lowlands, where they may be found in pear and apple orchards, towns, and streamside woods.  During fall and spring migrations (September to October and mid-April to early May), they are conspicuous in isolated patches of trees, orchards, and other lowland areas throughout the state.	Ruby-crowned Kinglets join mixed-species feeding flocks, but are generally less numerous in these flocks than Golden-crowned Kinglets. Ruby-crowned Kinglets glean food from foliage. They often hover to get at the undersides of leaves and twigs, and less often hang upside-down from twigs and branches as Golden-crowned Kinglets do.  They tend to forage lower down than Golden-crowned Kinglets, especially outside of the breeding season. They are very active and frequently flick their wings.	Ruby-crowned Kinglets eat tiny insects, spiders, and eggs, especially eggs that are stuck to the undersides of leaves and twigs.  In winter they also eat some seeds, sap, and berries.	Recorded only at high elevations, with most records from subalpine zone. Prefers drier forests, where uses small forest openings such as wooded marshes and swamps. Local and uncommon in King County, but records slightly more widespread than predicted range mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Fairly common locally in Kittitas County, with highest density from Naneum Ridge in eastern Wenatchee Mountains.	Ruby-crowned Kinglets are monogamous but form new pair bonds each breeding season.  Their nests are usually 40 or more feet from the ground.  Females build the nests, which are usually in conifers.  The typical Ruby-crowned Kinglet nest is deep and is suspended from two hanging twigs.  It is usually well hidden and protected from above by an overhanging branch.  Moss, grass, lichen, bark strips, twigs, rootlets, needles, and spider webs comprise its outer walls, and feathers, plant down, and hair form a soft lining.  Females incubate large clutches.  In fact, Ruby-crowned Kinglets have the largest clutch relative to size of any North American passerine.  Clutches in the Pacific Northwest typically contain 9 to 10 eggs, sometimes as many as 12.  Incubation lasts for about two weeks.  During this time the male brings food to the female on the nest.  The female broods the young for a few days after hatching, and then joins the male in bringing food to the young.  The young leave the nest about 16 days after hatching.  The male continues to feed the young from the first brood for another 10 days, but the female may leave the breeding territory.  Ruby-crowned Kinglets raise only one brood a year.	Ruby-crowned Kinglets migrate slightly earlier in the fall and later in the spring than Golden-crowned Kinglets.  They are less well adapted to cold and thus winter farther south than Golden-crowned Kinglets.  How far north they remain in any given year is typically determined by temperature.	ruby-crowned_kinglet	RCKI			
395	56	Regulus	satrapa	Golden-crowned Kinglet	Common resident.	LC	Golden-crowned Kinglets have expanded their range into new areas in the northeastern United States, and the population appears stable across its range.  Much of their breeding area is remote and has escaped most human impact.  However, in other areas, including Washington, large sections of their former breeding grounds have been cleared. The Washington Christmas Bird Count records an increase in the numbers of wintering birds, but this may represent breeders from more remote areas north of Washington.	Golden-crowned Kinglets are tiny, active, strikingly marked olive-green to gray songbirds.  Their wings are dark, with two white wing-bars.  There is a black smudge below the second wing-bar. Their legs are black and their feet, yellow.  Their faces are white with a black stripe through the eye and another at the base of their yellow crests.  These bold stripes and the yellow crests are distinctive field marks on both sexes.  Crests on males shade to orange-red in the center.  Females look like males but lack the orange within the yellow crest.		1	Most Golden-crowned Kinglets breed in dense fir and spruce forests with closed canopies, often in remote locations.  Some also breed in heavily wooded urban areas.  During migration and in winter they can be found in a wide variety of habitats, including lowland deciduous woodlands, orchards, Ponderosa pine forests, and along tree-lined streams, though they tend to prefer conifers.	The Columbia Basin separates the two subspecies of Golden-crowned Kinglet that breed in Washington.  In western Washington, the Golden-crowned Kinglet is one of the most common species of wet coniferous forests all the way to the outer coast.  They are common year round in appropriate habitat, from the lowlands up to Snoqualmie and Stevens Passes.  They can be especially abundant in the winter in the foothills and at mid-elevations.  They are less abundant but still common in eastern Washington, where they breed in higher forests (above the Ponderosa pine zone) and migrate through the shrub-steppe zone.	Golden-crowned Kinglets are fairly easy to see during the winter when they flock with other small birds and can occur in large numbers.  They are often found foraging high in the canopy, where they hover in front of and under branches or hang from twig-tips to glean food from their undersides and from the undersides of leaves. They also fly out to catch tiny, flying insects. Their flight is quick and fluttery, and they frequently flick their wings. In winter and on migration they often forage much lower.	Golden-crowned Kinglets are primarily insectivorous.  They eat tiny insects, spiders, and insect eggs, especially those eggs that are stuck to the undersides of leaves and twigs.  They also eat some seeds, sap, and occasionally fruit.	Common and widespread in closed-canopy, moist coniferous forests throughout four-county area. In Kittitas County, generally nests above ponderosa pine zone in dense, mature forests. In western counties, occurs in most coniferous forests including small, fragmented stands within developed residential areas.	Golden-crowned Kinglets are monogamous, but form new pair bonds each breeding season.  Their nests are not often found, as they are usually located 50 or more feet from the ground.  Both members of the pair build the nest, which is typically in a conifer.  The nest usually hangs close to the trunk between two horizontal twigs and is well protected from above by an overhanging branch.  Moss, lichen, bark strips, twigs, and spider webs comprise the outer walls of the deep nest, and feathers, plant down, rootlets, and hair provide a soft lining.  Females incubate large clutches, typically of 8 to 9 eggs but sometimes as many as 11.  Incubation lasts about two weeks.  During this time the male brings food to the female on the nest.  The female broods the young for 3 to 5 days after they hatch, and then joins the male in bringing them food.  The young leave the nest 16 to 19 days after hatching.  The male continues to feed the young from the first brood for another 12 to 16 days while the female begins a second clutch.	Golden-crowned Kinglets migrate but travel later in the fall and earlier in the spring than most other insect-eaters.  They are hardier than Ruby-crowned Kinglets and winter farther north, although some winter as far south as southern Mexico.  Some birds may be permanent residents, and there is considerable overlap between summer and winter ranges, all of which makes their migration pattern difficult to understand.	golden-crowned_kinglet	GCKI			
396	32	Rhodostethia	rosea	Ross's Gull		LC		A glamorous native of the high Arctic in the Old World, Ross&#8217;s Gull is rarely seen by North American birders except along the northern Alaska coast (where it occurs in fall migration) or at Churchill, Manitoba, where a small, isolated population was discovered nesting some years ago. A small gull&#8212;the size of a Bonaparte&#8217;s&#8212;it has a tiny, dark bill, pale gray upperparts, and underparts washed with pink in adults. In flight, the long, wedge-shaped tail and prominent white trailing edge of the wing are evident; the underwing usually appears darker than the upperwing. Consult a good field guide for separating immature plumages of Ross&#8217;s Gull and other small gull species.

Ross&#8217;s Gull has been recorded only about two dozen times in the Lower 48, from coast to coast and as far south as Maryland, Missouri, and California. Washington&#8217;s only Ross&#8217;s Gull visited McNary Dam on the Columbia River, on both the Oregon and Washington sides, from 27 November to 1 December 1994. Oregon had one previous record, at Yaquina Bay from 18 February to 1 March 1987. Idaho also has a single record, from 21 to 27 January 1998 at the American Falls Reservoir. The first Ross&#8217;s Gull to be found in temperate North America visited Victoria, British Columbia, from 27 October to 9 November 1966. This is still the only record for the province.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								rosss_gull				
397	28	Riparia	riparia	Bank Swallow	Common summer resident east. Rare west.	LC	According to the Breeding Bird Survey, the number of Bank Swallows in Washington has increased (although not significantly) since 1966.  Because Bank Swallows are patchily distributed, the Breeding Bird Survey might not accurately reflect their true status, but the population of Bank Swallows in Washington is probably large and stable. Bank Swallows adapt well to new surroundings and colonize areas quickly, necessary traits, since the banks in which they nest are often unstable and easily eroded.	Called the Sand Martin in some parts of the world, the Bank Swallow is North America's smallest swallow. It has slender wings and a long, narrow, slightly forked tail that appears almost square in flight. Like other swallows, Bank Swallows have tiny feet and bills, although their bills are more conical than those of other swallows. They are brown above and slightly darker on the wings than on the back and rump. They have a distinct breast-band and white throat, with some white wrapping back to their ears. Juveniles look like adults. Bank Swallows can be confused with Northern Rough-winged Swallows, but Northern Rough-wingeds lack the dark breast-band and forked tail.		1	Usually found near water, Bank Swallows are closely associated with sandy, vertical banks along rivers and lakes or where a bank has been created by human excavation. Bank Swallows forage over water or open fields.	Bank Swallows are common in eastern Washington from late April through August.  They are found in open areas with sand banks near water or wetlands. There is a large breeding area with an estimated 10,000 burrows along the Columbia River opposite White Bluffs (Benton County). Bank Swallows are rare during migration in western Washington. They do occasionally breed west of the Cascades; nesting colonies have recently been discovered along the Toutle River (Cowlitz County) and the Green River near Auburn (King County).	Bank Swallows are usually seen in flocks, flying low over ponds and rivers. They usually forage in flight, but in severe weather they may forage on the ground. Their quick, fluttery wing-beats are more shallow and rapid than those of other swallows. These highly social birds nest in dense colonies of from 10 to 2,000 nests.	Bank Swallows feed almost entirely on flying insects.	Locally common colonial nester, primarily in Kittitas County in lower forest zone and below tree line. Needs soft banks to burrow nest holes; one colony in Easton utilizes public works sand pile. Breeding in western Washington only recently confirmed and apparently expanding, including small colony along Green River near Auburn first discovered in 2001 after close of atlas period.	Bank Swallows are monogamous, although extra-pair copulations are common. These swallows use their tiny, conical bills and small feet to dig burrows in sandy banks. These banks are often not stable, and colonies move frequently because the banks collapse. The male generally digs the burrow, which can be up to five feet long. Deep inside the burrow, the female builds the nest of grass, rootlets, and weeds, lined with feathers. Both members of the pair incubate the 4 to 5 eggs for 14 to 16 days. Both feed the young, which leave the nest 18 to 24 days after hatching. The parents continue to feed the young for 3 to 5 days after they leave the nest.	Long-distance migrants, Bank Swallows are the last of Washington's swallows to arrive here in the spring. They begin their migration to South America soon after the young become independent, in late July or early August. Another wave of migrants, possibly Canadian breeders, appears here in early September. Bank Swallows gather in large groups before heading south, and they migrate in mixed flocks with Cliff, Tree, and Barn Swallows.	bank_swallow	BANS			
398	32	Rissa	brevirostris	Red-legged Kittiwake		VU		Red-legged Kittiwake

This small gull breeds on a few islands in the Bering Sea region and winters at sea across the northern Pacific Ocean, west to Japan and east to the Gulf of Alaska. It is a close relative of the widely distributed Black-legged Kittiwake and similar in appearance. Some important differences are Red-legged Kittiwake&#8217;s shorter bill, red leg color (pink in juveniles), darker gray mantle, and the absence of the Black-legged&#8217;s strong black juvenal wing pattern. See field guides for other distinguishing traits.

The status of Red-legged Kittiwake in the Pacific Northwest is imperfectly known due to lack of observers in its pelagic habitat. However, it appears to be a rare but probably regular visitor to inshore and offshore waters along the outer coast. Most records are in winter and early spring (December through April): six from Oregon, five from Washington, and one from British Columbia. Eight of these 12 records have been of birds found dead or dying on beaches. The region&#8217;s three summer records&#8212;two from Washington, one from Oregon&#8212;occurred from late June to mid-August.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								red-legged_kittiwake				
399	32	Rissa	tridactyla	Black-legged Kittiwake	Fairly common outer coast. Casual inland.	VU	Atlantic populations have experienced growth in recent years. Pacific populations of Black-legged Kittiwakes fluctuate dramatically. They are relatively insensitive to the direct effects of oil spills, but they are indirectly affected by a reduction in prey species. In years when food is scarce, their nesting success is significantly reduced.  In addition to the obvious effects of lack of food, when prey is scarce, the adults range farther from the nest and are away for longer periods of time, leaving the eggs and the young exposed, and thus more vulnerable to predators. Years of near-total breeding failure for colonies have been observed in years when the diving birds in the same area do not experience a similar decline, indicating that surface feeders may be responding to different environmental disturbances than diving birds. For this reason, Black-legged Kittiwakes have been proposed as a good indicator species of marine health.	The Black-legged Kittiwake is a medium-sized gull, with the typical 'gull-like' appearance of white head and body, slate-gray back and wings, black wingtips, and a yellow bill. The legs are black. The juvenile has bold, black edgings on its wings and the nape of its neck, and a black bill. Black-legged Kittiwakes fly with stiffer wing-beats than other gulls.		1	A pelagic gull, this kittiwake spends most of the year at sea. The Black-legged Kittiwakes gather in areas of upwellings, sometimes over the edge of the continental shelf. They can be found from the coast to over a hundred miles offshore. They breed on narrow cliff ledges in the far north.	Seldom seen over land in Washington, Black-legged Kittiwakes may be seen from shore, especially after storms. The largest numbers can be seen on offshore boating trips, but these kittiwakes can be seen off the jetties at Westport (Grays Harbor County) and Ilwaco (Pacific County), and at the mouth of the Columbia River (Pacific County).  In recent years, they have been found perched on the jetties and even on mudflats around Grays Harbor (Grays Harbor County). Offshore, they are common from September through April and uncommon the rest of the year, although abundance varies greatly from year to year. Most birds seen in the summer months are immature.	Black-legged Kittiwakes are surface feeders, dropping from flight to take items off the surface of the water, or plunging into the water for prey just below the surface, but not diving deeply. They also forage while swimming. They are generally silent when seen in Washington, but on their breeding grounds, Black-legged Kittiwakes are very vocal, repeating a call that sounds like their name.	Small surface-schooling fish make up the majority of the Black-legged Kittiwake's diet. When these fish aren't available, the kittiwakes eat krill and other sea creatures. They occasionally feed on waste from ships. Black-legged Kittiwakes do not feed at garbage dumps as do many other gull species.		Black-legged Kittiwakes are monogamous during the breeding season, but do not maintain their pair bonds during the non-breeding season. Many will, however, re-pair with the same mate in the following year. They first breed at 3-5 years of age. On a narrow cliff edge, both parents help build a nest of mud, seaweed, and grass with a shallow depression in the middle. The female lays 1-3 eggs, and both sexes help incubate for about 4 weeks. The young stay in the nest for 5-8 weeks, and both parents provide food. After fledging, the young may return to the nest for a few more weeks. The nest ledges are so narrow that the birds must face towards the cliff, with tails pointed out, to fit.	Most migration takes place offshore. Numbers moving through Washington during migration are highly variable from year to year. Since Black-legged Kittiwakes do not breed in Washington, migration is when we are most likely to see them. The fall movement begins in August and peaks in September. The highly variable spring migration may be more conspicuous than fall and runs from early April to early June.	black-legged_kittiwake				
400	66	Salpinctes	obsoletus	Rock Wren	Common summer resident east. Uncommon winter.	LC	Currently widespread and common, Rock Wrens have been increasing significantly in Washington since 1982.  Most of their nesting habitat is not adversely affected by human activities.  Livestock grazing near nesting Rock Wrens, however, may be responsible for an increased incidence of nest parasitism by Brown-headed Cowbirds and may be cause for concern.	The Rock Wren is the largest wren in Washington.  Its back is gray and speckled with light dots.  Its flanks are buff-yellow, and its breast is white streaked with gray.  Two eye-lines, white over dark, extend behind the eye.  In flight, a brown rump patch is evident, as are the pale tips of the tail.  The pale tip extends almost all the way across in a terminal band, but is interrupted in the middle by gray.  The undertail coverts are white with black bars. Juveniles look like adults but have less streaking on their breasts.		1	Rock Wrens can be found in open, arid surroundings on rocky slopes and canyons at a variety of elevations.  In winter, if no rocks are available, territory may be established around landmarks such as hay bales and farm equipment.  These wrens breed in rocky habitats, such as canyons, coulees, outcroppings, and talus slopes in the steppe and dry forests.	During summer, Rock Wrens are common in the steppe regions of eastern Washington.  They also breed above the tree line in the rocky habitats and clear-cuts along the Cascade Crest and in the Blue Mountains of southeastern Washington.  Vagrants can show up in western Washington during migration, and some breeding records exist in the San Juan Islands.  They have also colonized the ash- and pumice-covered slopes of Mt. St. Helens, following the 1980 eruption.  They may also be breeding above the tree line in the northeastern Olympic Mountains, but the majority of the breeding population is in the Columbia Basin.  During migration, they are commonly found at high elevations.  In mild winters, some Rock Wrens remain in small numbers at low elevations in southeastern and central Washington.	Rock Wrens use their long bills to probe into narrow crevices and find prey.  They are often seen bouncing up and down among the rocks as they forage.  Males often sing from rock promontories.	Insects and spiders are the predominant prey of the Rock Wren.	In Kittitas County, common in rocky canyons and talus slopes in steppe and dry-forest zones. Highest densities along Columbia and Yakima Rivers with lesser numbers extending west along Manastash and Naneum Ridges. Only King County record at Kelly Butte on 7 July 1995. Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) maps high-elevation terrain north of Snoqualmie Pass along both sides of Cascade crest and in western Wenatchee Mountains as peripheral breeding range. This prediction not supported by BBA surveys, perhaps in part due to access difficulties. Gap-predicted range across northwestern Kittitas Valley also not supported by BBA records.	The most curious aspect of the Rock Wren is its tendency to create a stone walkway at the entrance to its nest.  It is unknown what purpose this trail of flat stones and pebbles serves, but it is built by both sexes, before the nest cup.  Males establish a territory and sing to attract females. The pair bond is monogamous and lasts through the breeding season.  The nest is typically tucked in a crevice or hole, with the walkway the only external sign of its presence.  Inside the crevice, the wrens build a foundation of stone, on top of which the female builds a loose cup of grass, wood, bark, hair, and spider webbing, which the male helps bring to the nest.  The female incubates 5 to 6 eggs for 14 to 16 days.  When the young hatch, both parents feed them at the nest for about 14 to 16 days.  Once the young leave the nest, the parents continue to feed them for about a week.  After that, the young become independent of their parents for food, but may remain on their territory for another four weeks.	Rock Wrens are strongly migratory.  They leave northern breeding areas for winter ranges farther south or at lower elevations.  Most leave Washington in the winter, although a few remain in southeast and central Washington.	rock_wren	ROWR			
401	68	Sayornis	nigricans	Black Phoebe		LC		Three fall-winter records on lower Columbia River and outer coast, and one spring record near White Pass.		1								black_phoebe	BLPH			
402	68	Sayornis	phoebe	Eastern Phoebe		LC		Casual spring visitor, with four records east and one west. One December record from outer coast.		1								eastern_phoebe				
403	68	Sayornis	saya	Say's Phoebe	Fairly common summer east. Rare west and winter east.	LC	Say's Phoebes have increased slightly but not statistically significantly in numbers in Washington since 1966, although their numbers declined in many parts of the western United States until 1991. Recent studies have shown that this downward trend appears to have reversed, and increases have been recorded range-wide. Because they nest readily in man-made structures, they appear to adapt to changes in the landscape as long as foraging areas are free of disturbances.	Say's Phoebes are medium-sized, gray-brown flycatchers with salmon-pink bellies and solid black tails and bills. In flight, very pale, translucent, outer wing-feathers are just visible. The juvenile has salmon-colored wing-bars.		1	Open-country birds, Say's Phoebes are found in steppe and agricultural habitats in eastern Washington, especially treeless areas with cliffs and other sites for nesting.	During the breeding season they can be found throughout the Columbia Basin, to the foothills of the Blue Mountains, and up into the broad river valleys of the northeastern corner of the state. They are most conspicuous during the beginning of the breeding season in March and April when they call actively. Wintering birds can be found throughout eastern Washington, especially along the Snake and Columbia Rivers where single birds occur every few years. They are uncommon to rare in the western Washington lowlands during migration, in March.	Like other phoebes, Say's Phoebes bob their tails. They perch on low shrubs or rocks, and dart out to grab prey from the air, the foliage, or the ground. They can often be seen hovering low over fields looking for prey.	Say's Phoebes' primary diet is insects. They eat a number of terrestrial insects as well the typical flying variety.	Common in dry, open habitats such as shrub-steppe and agriculture lands at low to middle elevations east of Cascade crest. Must have solid structure for nesting, such as rocky outcrop or building.	Pairs are monogamous and nest on solid structures--natural or artificial. Natural nesting substrates include rocky outcroppings, crevices, cliffs, and tree cavities. Nests have also been found on such man-made structures as bridges, barn rafters, crossbeams, and eaves. The nest is an open cup made of grass, moss, spider webs, and other material, but usually does not include mud, a material common in the nests of other phoebe species. Generally, the female builds the nest on her own, and then incubates four to five eggs for 12 to 15 days. Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest at 14 to 16 days. Pairs typically raise one or two broods a season.	This hardy, medium-distance migrant is one of the earliest breeders to return to eastern Washington, arriving in the region as early as late February. They begin to head south to wintering grounds in the southwestern United States in August and continue into September.	says_phoebe	SAPH			
404	41	Seiurus	aurocapilla	Ovenbird	State Review Species	LC		A warbler with olive upperparts and whitish underparts that looks superficially like a small thrush, the Ovenbird nests in forests where males sing their ringing, rising &#8220;TEAcher-TEAcher-TEAcher&#8221; song from hidden perches. The spotted breast, white eye ring, and orange central crown framed by two black stripes are distinctive. Ovenbirds forage mostly on the ground, walking rather than hopping, turning over leaves to look for insects. Their closest approach to Washington in the nesting season is in northeastern British Columbia and the Rocky Mountains of Alberta and Montana. Wintering grounds are in Mexico, the West Indies, and Central America, and normal migration routes are from Texas eastward. However, the Ovenbird is one of the more frequent vagrant &#8220;eastern&#8221; warblers encountered in the West in both spring and fall (approaching 1,000 records in California and close to 40 in Oregon, where it is no longer on the state review list). Washington's 17 records are concentrated in May and June, with only three fall records. They are split about equally east and west of the Cascade crest, but with none on the outer coast. Curiously, there are no records for Idaho.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								ovenbird				
405	41	Seiurus	noveboracensis	Northern Waterthrush	Uncommon summer east. Rare winter west.	LC	The population of Northern Waterthrushes is considered stable and of low management concern at this time. Most of their breeding range is fairly well protected, but their wintering range is at risk because many mangrove forests have been cut to make way for increasing human populations in the tropics. Northern Waterthrushes are also hosts for Brown-headed Cowbirds, but not at a rate that warrants conservation concern at this time.	The Northern Waterthrush is a large warbler with a long, heavy bill and a flattish head. Males and females look alike. They are dark brown above and buff-white with dark streaks below. They have distinctive dark eye-lines with a white line above that, and dark caps. Their wings and tails appear solid dark-brown from above.		1	Northern Waterthrushes breed in cool, dark, forested wetlands, frequently along the margins of ponds or lakes. They are found in both coniferous and broadleaved forests, but in Washington, they typically inhabit alder or willow stands near standing water. During migration, they can be found in back yards and city parks, often away from water, but they are most likely to be found in thick cover along streams or ponds. Northern Waterthrushes often winter in mangrove swamps.	Although there are a few records from western Washington (Skagit and King Counties), the Northern Waterthrush is a bird of northeastern Washington. These birds can be found uncommonly from mid-May through the end of August in eastern Okanogan, Ferry, Stevens, Pend Oreille, and northern Spokane Counties. There is a breeding population in northeastern Oregon, so breeders are possible in the Blue Mountains of southeastern Washington. They are also rare on the east slope of the Cascades. Western Washington sightings generally occur during migration or in winter.	Northern Waterthrushes spend much of their time on the ground, wading through standing water, walking along the ground, and hopping over downed logs and other obstacles. They bob their rear ends constantly'a good identifying behavior. They will forage in foliage, but most foraging is on the ground, in shallow water, or around partially submerged logs and other objects. They toss aside dead and soggy debris as they search for food. Males sing to attract mates, and once paired, they continue to sing throughout the mating season.	Northern Waterthrushes eat large aquatic and terrestrial insects, small crustaceans, and other invertebrates.		Pairs typically form as soon as females arrive on the nesting grounds. Monogamous pairs are the norm, but males with multiple mates are not unheard of.  The male selects a general area for nesting, and the female chooses the exact nest site and builds the nest. The nest is usually on the ground, tucked under an upturned tree root, along a bank, in a fern clump, or up to two feet off the ground in a moss-covered stump. The nest is usually covered and has a side entrance. It is built of moss, pine needles, leaves, twigs, bark, and other plant material, and lined with hair. The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 12 to 13 days, and then broods the young for about 5 days after they hatch. Both parents feed the young. Nine to 10 days after hatching, the young leave the nest, and the parents divide the brood, each taking half. The young can fly well within a week or so of leaving the nest, but remain with the parent. The parents provide food for at least four weeks after the young fledge. Each pair raises only one brood a season.	Northern Waterthrushes migrate to Central and northern South America, although small numbers winter in Florida. They migrate mostly at night. Populations breeding in British Columbia may migrate south along the Cascades, but many northwest populations take a more easterly route in the fall than they do in the spring.	northern_waterthrush				
406	66	Selasphorus	platycercus	Broad-tailed Hummingbird		LC		One record, from August 2000 in Asotin County.		1								broad-tailed_hummingbird				
407	66	Selasphorus	rufus	Rufous Hummingbird	Common summer resident.	NT	Rufous Hummingbirds are common throughout their range, although the Breeding Bird Survey shows a significant decline from 1982-1991.  They are listed on both the Audubon-Washington and Partners in Flight lists of species-at-risk.	Rufous Hummingbirds are small and compact. Except for their white chests and short green wings, males are rufous all over, the only rufous-backed North American hummingbird. Females are green above, with rufous flanks and rufous at the base of the tail, visible when spread. Their throats have a reddish central spot which is not always visible.		1	Typically found at edges and in open areas within coniferous forests, Rufous Hummingbirds are also found in sub-alpine shrubby habitats and in residential areas.  In damp western Washington, they are found in many habitats. On the dry side of the Cascades they are limited to higher elevations and other locations where rainfall is greater.	Most common in western Washington, Rufous Hummingbirds are also found in the eastern Cascades, the northeastern corner of the state, and the Blue Mountains.  In eastern Washington, they are normally found above the lower part of the Ponderosa pine zone.  In the Columbia Basin, they can be found breeding in residential areas.  Look for them in salmonberry patches in the spring and at hummingbird feeders.	In courtship, the male attracts the female with an aerial display.  He dives close to a female, his feathers making a loud whining sound near the bottom of an oval trajectory.  Rufous Hummingbirds are highly territorial, defending feeding territories not only while breeding but also during migration.  Rufous Hummingbirds do not sing but make warning chips in response to perceived threats.  Their wings make a whine much like the sound of a cicada.	Rufous Hummingbirds feed on insects and on nectar from flowers.  In Washington, they feed heavily on red flowering currant, salmonberry, honeysuckle, and on sugar-water at hummingbird feeders.	Common throughout westside counties from sea level to Cascade crest in wide variety of habitats, including openings in coniferous and mixed forests, shrubby edges, parks and gardens, mountain valleys and meadows, avalanche chutes, and ski slopes. Rarely breeds in greater Seattle urban area. Fairly common in Kittitas County from lower tree line to Cascade crest, mostly above ponderosa pine zone.	The female Rufous Hummingbird commonly builds her nest over the previous year's nest, which is typically 2 to 10 feet from the ground in a coniferous tree.  In the Puget Sound area, nests are often built among huckleberry bushes, alders, blackberries, or drooping conifer branches.  In western Washington, protection from rain and other weather is a major factor in nest location.  Nests built early in the breeding season are situated low in conifers, protecting them from the rain and cold.  Nests built later in the summer are found high in deciduous trees where they are less likely to overheat.  The nest is built with moss, lined with plant down, covered on the outside with lichen and bark, and held together with spider webbing.  The female lays two eggs and incubates them for 15-17 days.  She feeds and cares for the young by herself until they become independent at about 21 days.	Rufous Hummingbirds winter in Mexico and south Texas.  In recent years, they have been wintering more frequently in the gulf states and have attempted to winter in the northeast.  In the spring, they migrate up the Pacific Coast, reaching as far north as south-central Alaska, and they are thus the northernmost breeding hummingbird.  Because of their coastal migration, they arrive on the Washington coast before they are seen inland.  They arrive in Washington from late February to early March and their arrival typically coincides with the bloom of red flowering currant and salmonberry.  In June and July, males leave the breeding grounds for higher elevations, from which they will later migrate south.  Females and juveniles leave the state from late July through September, with most migrating in August.	rufous_hummingbird	RUHU			
408	66	Selasphorus	sasin	Allen's Hummingbird		LC		Only state record is of a male collected in Seattle in May 1894.		1								allens_hummingbird				
409	41	Setophaga	ruticilla	American Redstart	Uncommon to locally fairly common summer resident.	LC	Although American Redstarts are still widespread and common throughout their range, they have experienced declines in many regions. Some of these declines may be from habitat loss due to natural maturation of forests, but others may be directly or indirectly related to habitat degradation from fragmentation. Fragmentation creates more edges, which initially attract more American Redstarts because of the increased brush in these areas. Later, however, predators and nest parasites are also attracted to edges, resulting in reduced productivity at forest edges. In a study in British Columbia, over 63% of American Redstart nests were parasitized by Brown-headed Cowbirds. In the West, many streamside forests have been eliminated or degraded, which may account for significant declines seen in western populations. Habitat destruction on the wintering grounds is also a conservation concern. In addition to natural forests, American Redstarts use shade-coffee plantations during the winter; supporting shade-grown coffee may help protect some of their winter habitat.	The American Redstart is a unique warbler. The male is black with orange patches on each wing, on the sides of its breast, and at the base of its tail on either side. The male's throat is black, but its breast and belly are white. The female is gray where the male is black, and yellow where the male is orange. The female also has a white eye-ring.  Juveniles and first-year males look like females, although first-year males generally have some black on the upper breast or head. The American Redstart has a relatively short, wide bill.		1	Throughout their range, American Redstarts are found in moist, second-growth hardwood forests, with a dense shrub layer. In Washington, they are typically confined to forested streamsides, especially those with willow and alder thickets. During the winter, American Redstarts inhabit a variety of tropical and subtropical lowland wooded habitats.	Although American Redstarts breed primarily in northeast Washington, there are a number of western Washington records. They are most common from mid-May to mid-August in the far northeastern corner of the state: eastern Okanogan, Ferry, Stevens, and Pend Oreille Counties. They are found (rarely) in a few spots on the east slope of the Cascades, and in southeastern Washington at the base of the Blue Mountains. Migrants, summer residents, and possibly some breeders are also found infrequently in northwestern Washington. Western Washington American Redstarts are most commonly seen along the Skagit River at the Skagit/Whatcom County line.	American Redstarts are very active foragers. They glean some of their prey from foliage, but they capture most of their food in midair, flying or jumping into the air to snag prey. They commonly spread their tails and wings, displaying their orange or yellow spots. These flash-patterns may flush prey from the foliage, and also make American Redstarts relatively easy to find.	Small insects and other invertebrates make up most of the American Redstart's diet. In late summer, they may supplement this diet with berries and seeds.	Rare and local breeder in central Kittitas County. Only confirmed record pair feeding fledgling on 24 June 2000 near Liberty, in high-quality, mature, hardwood-dominated forest preferred by this species. Most records represent late, displaced, spring-migrant males singing unsuccessfully on territory. Core Washington breeding range in hardwood forests of northeastern part of state. Nearest regular breeding to our area lies to north, with small numbers found at middle elevation along Skagit River in Skagit County; also breeds more intermittently to south, in western Klickitat County near Cascade crest.	Monogamous pairs are the norm, but some males may have two or three mates at a time. The male shows the female potential nest sites during courtship, and the female makes the final selection. The nest is nestled against a trunk, or attached to vertical stems, from 4 to 70 feet off the ground. The female builds the nest, which is an open cup made of bark, grass, rootlets, and other plant fibers. The lining is usually made of feathers and hair. The outside may be camouflaged with lichen and birch bark, and the whole nest is held together with spider webbing. Sometimes American Redstarts will use old nests of other birds. The female typically incubates 4 eggs for 10 to 13 days. Both members of the pair feed the young. About 9 days after hatching, the young leave the nest, and the parents divide the brood, each taking half, and continue to feed them for at least a few more days.	Most American Redstarts migrate south through North America and winter in Mexico, Central America, and northern South America. Western breeders appear to migrate to western wintering areas, including southern California, Mexico, and Central America.  They migrate at night, generally in the late spring and early fall.	american_redstart				
410	67	Sialia	currucoides	Mountain Bluebird	Fairly common summer resident, mostly east.	LC	Since much of their nesting habitat is remote, Mountain Bluebirds have been less affected than other species by nest site competition with starlings and other invasive species.  Artificial nest boxes have helped keep overall population numbers healthy.  In Washington, nest boxes have allowed for range expansion into new habitats where they previously had no place to nest. In the past century, they did experience a decline in western Washington, and they are no longer breeding in the Olympic Peninsula.	Mountain Bluebirds are characterized by an overall blue wash. They lack the bold rufous coloring of Western Bluebirds. Males are a striking sky-blue color.  Females are predominantly gray with a bluish tint, especially on the wings and tail. Females have a white eye-ring, which males lack, and some females may have some light rufous on their throats and breasts.		1	Mountain Bluebirds occur in varied, open terrain, more open than the habitat of Western Bluebirds. They are found in alpine parklands, and also at lower elevations in steppe areas, open woodlands with Ponderosa pine, forests openings, clearings, and logged areas where a few snags have been left.	Mountain Bluebirds can be found in alpine parklands in the Cascades, the Blue Mountains, and the northeast corner of Washington. They are absent as breeders from the Olympic Mountains. In western Washington, they can be found locally near Mount Rainier and Mount St. Helens. In eastern Washington they can be found along Umtanum Ridge (Yakima County), Elk Heights (Kittitas County), in the foothills of the Blue Mountains, and at mid-elevations on the east slope of the Cascades in meadows and logged areas. There is a significant population in Klickitat County around Bickleton where an intensive nest box program has provided many nesting opportunities. The Mountain Bluebird is the only bluebird that nests in alpine parkland and high elevation open areas.  In the winter they can be found in flocks in similar habitat and more open, treeless terrain, but they are very uncommon.	Mountain Bluebirds hover low over the grass in open fields, and drop to the ground to pounce on prey. They also catch food in mid-air, by darting out from a perch.	The Mountain Bluebird's diet consists of a combination of insects and berries Insects make up a larger percentage of their diet than is the case with other thrushes.	In Kittitas County, common in many habitats with available nesting cavities, including open conifer forest at high elevation and in ponderosa pine zone, logged areas, farm fields and grazing lands, and higher-elevation shrub-steppe. Fairly common near Cascade crest in southeastern King County, where nests in snags. Two possible records from moderate elevation in western Cascades, both well outside predicted range mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Species regularly occurs in westside lowlands in migration, so these birds may have been transients.	Cavity-nesters, they rely on natural holes in trees, old woodpecker holes, and man-made cavities for nesting spots. If a traditional cavity can't be located, they will nest in cliff holes, dirt banks, or old swallow nests. The female selects the cavity, and both build a loose cup-nest with stems, grass, and twigs, lined with softer materials. The female lays and incubates 5 to 6 eggs. Both parents feed the young, which fledge within 2½ to 3 weeks of hatching. The parents continue to tend the young for another 3 to 4 weeks, after which they lay a second brood.	The most migratory of the bluebirds, most Mountain Bluebirds leave the nesting grounds in September or October for their wintering grounds in the southwestern United States and Mexico, returning to the nesting grounds in March. They migrate short distances, sometimes forming large flocks in the winter at low elevations in Ponderosa pine and juniper forest.  The few birds that stay in Washington are found east of the Cascades, where they sometimes join groups of robins and solitaires.	mountain_bluebird				
411	67	Sialia	mexicana	Western Bluebird	Fairly common summer, mostly east. Rare winter.	LC	In recent decades, the Western Bluebird has declined over much of its range. This decline is well documented in western Washington where it is attributed to a combination of competition with House Sparrows and European Starlings for nesting cavities, a reduction of natural cavities, and regional climactic changes that have resulted in reduced numbers of prey. An intense nest box program has helped a population in the Fort Lewis area to rebound, and helped with the re-establishment of breeding pairs in other areas of western Washington where Western Bluebirds once were present.	The deep blue on the head, wings, and tail of the male Western Bluebird contrast with the bold rufous coloring on its breast and between its shoulders. The female is a faded version of the male and has a white eye-ring that the male lacks.		1	Western Bluebirds are found in open coniferous forests, farmlands, and steppe habitats, often eastern Washington at the edges where the forest meets the steppe zone. Forest openings and clearings and agricultural areas are also good habitat for the Western Bluebird. In winter, they inhabit a wider variety of open and semi-open terrain, especially piñon-juniper forests, farmlands, and deserts.	Western Bluebirds can be found in eastern Washington at the edges where the forest meets the steppe. They are also found in open coniferous forest, especially Ponderosa pine. They are especially common in areas where nest box projects have provided them with adequate cavities. Nest boxes are in place in Kittitas, Yakima, Klickitat, Walla Walla, Columbia, and Garfield Counties. In western Washington, Western Bluebirds are now regular, but uncommon, in the Fort Lewis area, and rare in forest clearings in King, Pierce, Thurston, and Mason Counties, and in prairie areas near Port Townsend (Jefferson County), at the mouth of the Naselle River (Pacific County), Forks (Clallam County), and other sites on the eastern Olympic Peninsula. They can also be found year round in Skamania County.	Western Bluebirds are often seen perching alone on fence wires, posts, snags, or tree branches by open meadows, pouncing on the ground to catch insects. They also fly out to catch aerial prey and grab insects from twigs and leaves.	In summer, Western Bluebirds eat primarily insects. In winter, berries and small fruits become more important parts of the diet, with mistletoe, juniper, and elderberry all important food items.	Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) did not map Western Bluebird as breeding in Island or Kitsap Counties, prediction borne out by BBA surveys with exception of single confirmed record at Bear Lake in southern Kitsap. In King County, uncommon and local in forest clearings at lower elevations of western Cascade flank. Locally common in Kittitas County in open conifer forests, farmlands, steppe habitats, and ecotone between forest and steppe zones. Absent from Kittitas Valley agricultural lands northwest of Ellensburg, contra predicted range in Gap report.	The male arrives on the breeding grounds before the female, and defends the nesting territory by singing. They are cavity-nesters, finding a natural hollow in a tree, an old woodpecker hole, a hole in a building, or a man-made nest box. Preferred nest-holes are fairly low, less than 50 feet from the ground. The female builds the nest, although the male may help. The nest is a loose cup of twigs and weeds, lined with finer plant materials. The female incubates the 4 to 6 eggs, while the male brings her food. Once the eggs hatch, she broods the young while he continues to bring food. They both feed the young, which fledge at 2 to 3 weeks, The adults then have a second brood.	The Western Bluebird is the least migratory of the bluebirds, and much of its migration is altitudinal rather than latitudinal. In eastern Washington, most birds migrate south in the fall to locations throughout the southwestern United States and central Mexico.  Small flocks occasionally remain through the winter in valleys, especially in mild winters. To the west of the Cascades, most of the population retreats to lower elevations in the winter. On both sides of the mountains, the winter range varies with food sources. In any case, they are very uncommon in winter.	western_bluebird	WEBL			
412	58	Sitta	canadensis	Red-breasted Nuthatch	Common resident.	LC	Range-wide, Red-breasted Nuthatches have increased in population since 1966. In Washington, however, they have experienced a slight (non-significant) decline in the breeding season, although Christmas Bird Counts have recorded an increase in wintering populations. Red-breasted Nuthatches are limited by the availability of soft snags, softer than those suitable for woodpeckers. Many logging practices remove dead or diseased trees, especially those soft enough for Red-breasted Nuthatches to excavate.	The Red-breasted Nuthatch is a compact bird with rufous undersides and slate upperparts. It has long, strong toes and claws, and a long, solid bill. This nuthatch has a white chin, black eyeline, and white line above the eye-line, in addition to a narrow, dark cap at the top of the head. The cap is black in males.  Females have gray caps and a slightly lighter rufous color on the undersides. The white markings on either side of the short tail can be seen in flight in both sexes.		1	Red-breasted Nuthatches typically prefer mature, wet, coniferous forests with closed canopies, especially those of spruce or fir. They can also be found in more open forests and patches of smaller trees.	In Washington, Red-breasted Nuthatches are common in forested areas throughout the state, but are most abundant in old-growth and mature Douglas-fir forests with standing dead trees. They are less common in outer coastal forests, where they do not appear to breed. During winter, they can also be found in small groves of trees in the Columbia Basin.	Like other nuthatches, Red-breasted Nuthatches use their strong legs and claws to walk up, down, and sideways on tree trunks, probing in the bark crevices for food. They readily come to seed and suet feeders and will cache food in crevices to return to later. Pishing and imitated Pygmy-Owl hooting, two typical attraction calls of birders, are very successful in bringing out Red-breasted Nuthatches. They are often the first species to respond, and will boldly come quite close to human observers.	Insects and spiders are the main foods in the summer. During winter, Red-breasted Nuthatches eat many insects that they pry from food caches in bark crevices, but they also eat many seeds. In developed areas they have learned to eat suet and peanut butter mixes as well.	Common breeding species throughout in forested landscapes, including residential areas. No records from dry shrub-steppe of eastern Kittitas County, although in some years transients may be found in riparian or irrigated situations in steppe zone during summer season.	Red-breasted Nuthatches form monogamous pairs. They usually excavate their own cavities in a rotten snag, often aspen, and require fairly soft wood to excavate. They will occasionally use a natural cavity, old woodpecker hole, or artificial nest box. Both members of the pair create the nest hole, and the female builds the nest inside. The nest is a soft cup of grass, needles, bark fibers, moss, feathers, and hair. Both sexes coat the inside and outside of the nest hole entrance with pitch that may help keep predators and competitors away. They sometimes use a piece of bark to transport the pitch to the nest and then smear it on the entrance hole. They avoid the pitch by flying straight into the hole. The female incubates 5 to 8 eggs for 12 to 13 days. Both parents feed the young for 18 to 21 days on the nest, and for about two more weeks after they fledge. Second broods are rare within a single breeding season.	Red-breasted Nuthatches are the only nuthatches that regularly migrate down-slope in winter. Thus many birds from mountainous nesting areas move into the lowlands for winter, migrating as far south and east as the Snake River, and even out of Washington. The numbers of birds migrating south for the winter varies considerably from year to year, depending on cone crop yields in the north. Canadian and Alaskan breeders also come into Washington during the winter.	red-breasted_nuthatch	RBNU			
413	58	Sitta	carolinensis	White-breasted Nuthatch	Fairly common resident east. Uncommon west.	LC	The Breeding Bird Survey shows a small, not statistically significant decrease in the total number of White-breasted Nuthatches in Washington bewteen 1980 and 2002. The eastern-Washington subspecies remains common in the appropriate habitat. However the western-Washington subspecies has declined significantly in the past century and is now limited to Clark County in southern Washington. Washington was already at the northern extent of the oak woodland zone, and much of this habitat has been lost to development. As White-breasted nuthatches have vanished from areas in which oaks are still numerous, there must be other causes for the decline. The western Washington subspecies is currently listed as a subspecies-of-concern by the US Fish and Wildlife Service, and is a candidate for listing by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.	The largest of the three species of nuthatch in Washington, the White-breasted Nuthatch has a bright white breast and face. The white on the face extends above the eyes. Its upperparts are slate-gray, with streaks of black in the wings. Males have black caps, which extend to their necks and partially around the neck like a collar. Females' caps are similar, but gray. Both sexes are chestnut-colored under their short tails. In flight, white can be seen on either side of the tail. Like all of Washington's nuthatches, the White-breasted has strong legs and toes, long, curved talons, and a long, strong bill.		1	White-breasted Nuthatches are found in deciduous forests across much of their range, but in eastern Washington they are found primarily in Ponderosa pines. They are not as restricted to Ponderosa pine as the Pygmy Nuthatch, and will use Douglas fir and black cottonwood stands also. A subspecies that is rare in Washington but fairly common farther south lives in what little remains of Garry oak in western Washington.	The White-breasted Nuthatch is fairly common, although it may be patchily distributed in eastern Washington lowland woods. In western Washington, there was a small population at Fort Lewis south of Tacoma (Pierce County) until the late 1990s, but this and many southwestern Washington populations have been extirpated. The last stronghold of the western Washington subspecies is in and near Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge, where it can still be found fairly easily in the Garry oaks.	Like other nuthatches, the White-breasted uses its strong legs and claws to walk up, down, and sideways on tree trunks, probing in the bark crevices for food. They readily come to seed and suet feeders and cache food in crevices to return to later. White-breasted Nuthatches respond readily to imitated Pygmy-Owl calls.	Insects and spiders are the main food in the summer. During winter, White-breasted Nuthatches eat many insects that they pry from their wintering spots in bark crevices, but they also eat many seeds. In developed areas they have learned to eat suet and peanut butter mixes as well.	Uncommon to fairly common but local in dry forests of central and eastern Kittitas County at moderate to high elevations, mostly in ponderosa pine. Highest concentrations in Colockum-Naneum area below interior Douglas-fir zone, at elevation of 3,500?5,000 feet. Also utilizes black cottonwoods in riparian zones in Yakima River drainage.	Pairs form long-term bonds and remain on nesting territories year round. White-breasted Nuthatches do not generally excavate their own holes, but nest in a natural cavity or old woodpecker hole. They may occasionally use artificial nest boxes. The female builds the nest, which is a soft cup of bark fibers, grass, hair, and feathers. Sometimes mud is added to the entrance of the cavity, perhaps to keep larger predators away. They will also brush the nest, inside and out, with a crushed insect, perhaps coating the nest with chemical secretions that may keep predators away. The female incubates 5 to 9 eggs for 12 to 14 days. The male feeds the female while she incubates and helps her feed the young once they hatch. The young leave the nest at 14 to 26 days, but stay with the adults for several more weeks until they become completely independent.	White-breasted Nuthatches are usually permanent residents but may have irruptive movements in some winters. This is less common in White-breasted Nuthatches than in Red-breasted.	white-breasted_nuthatch				
414	58	Sitta	pygmaea	Pygmy Nuthatch	Fairly common resident east.	LC	In areas of the eastern Cascades with extensive Ponderosa pine forests, Pygmy Nuthatches are fairly common. They are less abundant in forests that are intensively managed for timber than they are in more natural settings. Severe forest fires can have a negative impact on the population. Pygmy Nuthatches are considered an indicator species, meaning the health of their population is an indication of the health of Ponderosa pine habitat and the other species that use this habitat. As such, they should be closely monitored.	The Pygmy Nuthatch is a small bird with a slate-gray back and buffy underside. Males and females look the same, with white chins extending up just below the eyes and gray-brown caps. The edge of the cap is darker than the rest, giving the Pygmy Nuthatch a dark eye-line. Its bill is long and solid, and it has long toes and talons. The white on each side of its short tail can be seen in flight.		1	In Washington, Pygmy Nuthatches are closely associated with old-growth Ponderosa pine forests and are seldom found outside of this habitat.	Pygmy Nuthatches can be found year round in the Ponderosa pine forests of the eastern Cascade lowlands, up to middle elevations (especially near Wenas Creek in Yakima County), locally in the Blue Mountains, and in the Ponderosa pine belt fringing the north side of the Columbia Basin (especially in the Okanogan and in Spokane).	Pygmy Nuthatches are the most social of Washington's nuthatches and are found in flocks year round. Winter flocks roost together in cavities. Pygmy Nuthatches forage primarily on cones and in needle clusters at the outermost tips of high pine branches. Because they are often high up in trees, they are most easily located by voice. Pygmy Nuthatches are one of only a few cooperatively breeding songbirds in North America. During the breeding season, about a third of the pairs have up to three helpers at the nest. These helpers are usually related males, often offspring from the previous year. These birds help defend the nest site and raise the young.	Insects, primarily weevils, leaf and bark beetles, are the predominant food in the summer, especially of the young. During winter, their diet includes many seeds. Pygmy Nuthatches will also come to seed and suet feeders.	Uncommon and local in open ponderosa pine forests of Kittitas County. With one exception (near Cle Elum airport), BBA records limited to Naneum, Colockum, and Manastash districts and do not support broadly mapped distribution across ponderosa pine zone predicted by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Species has probably declined historically, being closely linked to old stands of ponderosa pine, many of which have long since been logged off.	Pairs form long-term bonds and remain paired year round. Pygmy Nuthatches are cavity-nesters. They sometimes use natural cavities, woodpecker holes, or artificial nest boxes, but usually they excavate their own cavities. Both members of the pair dig the nest hole in a dead branch or snag of a Ponderosa pine or aspen. The nest hole is lined with bark strips, plant down, moss, cocoons, fur, and feathers. The female incubates 5 to 9 eggs for 12 to 17 days. While she incubates, the male and the helpers bring her food. Male, female, and helpers all feed the nestlings and fledglings. Young birds fledge at 14 to 22 days and are partially dependent on adult birds for 23 to 28 days post-fledging. Pairs occasionally raise two broods a season, but one brood is the norm.	Pygmy Nuthatches are mostly permanent residents, but mountain breeders will wander into lowlands in winters when cone crops are poor. They are, however, less likely to move out of their breeding grounds than are the other two nuthatch species in Washington.	pygmy_nuthatch				
415	6	Somateria	mollissima	Common Eider		NT		The largest duck in the northern hemisphere, the Common Eider is distributed around the Arctic and sub-Arctic in the Old World as well as the New World in several races or subspecies that show considerable geographic variation. The bulky form, elongated head, and long, sloping bill are distinctive of all races. The race that inhabits eastern Siberia, Alaska, and western Canada <I>(S.m. v-nigrum)</I> is the largest of all and has sometimes been described as a separate species, the Pacific Eider. Males are basically black-and-white with an orange bill; in breeding plumage they are more extensively white and show a greenish wash on the cheek and nape. Females are plain brown and finely barred, with gray bills. The bills of both sexes are feathered at the base.

The Pacific Eider retreats southward only minimally in winter; hence it is rarely seen south of the Gulf of Alaska. Washington has two accepted records, both quite recent: Port Angeles (Clallam County) in August 2004, and Tatoosh Island (Clallam County) in April 2005. British Columbia has four records. Oregon has none so far, while the first (and only) California record occurred in July 2004.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								common_eider				
416	6	Somateria	spectabilis	King Eider		LC		This large seaduck resides all around the northern hemisphere, breeding on tundra near coasts north of the Arctic Circle and wintering far enough south to escape winter ice, often at sea. It is a rare winter visitor along the West Coast outside Alaska. Washington has 11 accepted records ranging from late October to mid-May, all but one of them from inland marine waters; the other is from Westport (Grays Harbor County). British Columbia has about 30 records, California close to 40, and Oregon, 13. King Eiders are often found in the same places as other diving seaducks, especially Surf and White-winged Scoters.

The male in spectacular breeding plumage cannot be mistaken for any other bird. However, nearly all sightings of King Eider outside its normal range are of females and subadult males, which are much plainer and readily confused with Common Eider (an excessively rare bird along the West Coast). The main distinction is the latter&#8217;s larger head and longer, more extensively feathered bill. 

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								king_eider				
417	47	Sphyrapicus	nuchalis	Red-naped Sapsucker	Fairly common summer resident east. Rare west	LC	Red-naped Sapsuckers are considered a keystone species, as many other species feed at the sap wells they drill.  They were formerly lumped with Yellow-bellied Sapsuckers as one species, but were split off in 1985.  The Breeding Bird Survey has identified a non-significant annual increase in Washington since 1966.  In the Cascades, they sometimes hybridize with Red-breasted Sapsuckers.	Red-naped Sapsuckers are black and white birds with yellow and red accents.  Their upperparts are black barred with white, and they have a bold white stripe across each wing. They have yellowish bellies, black breast-bands, and red throats.  Their heads are bright red with black stripes through and above the eyes. A bold white stripe crosses their faces above the base of the bill and continues down each side of their necks, becoming yellowish as it flows over the shoulder and onto the breast.  Males and females look much alike, but females generally have less red on their throats and napes, which can vary from mostly red to mostly white.  Juveniles are mottled brown but have white wing-stripes like adults.		1	Red-naped Sapsuckers are the most common sapsucker in deciduous and streamside forests, especially in and around aspen, cottonwood, and willow.  They also breed in mixed coniferous forests and will use open- and closed-canopy forests, burns, and clear-cuts, if there are some remaining standing trees.	A summer visitor to eastern Washington, the Red-naped Sapsucker is common from April through mid-August throughout the forested and riparian zones of eastern Washington.  A few linger into early September. They are also rare breeders at high elevations just west of the Cascade crest.  There are a few questionable winter records from western Washington, and any winter sighting of a Red-naped Sapsucker should be closely scrutinized because the apparent Red-naped Sapsucker may in fact be a Red-breasted Sapsucker hybrid.	Sapsuckers get their name from their foraging strategy, which consists of drilling neat horizontal rows of holes in tree trunks and then returning to those holes later to feed on the running sap and the insects attracted to it.  Unlike most woodpeckers, they forage in healthy trees and can actually kill a tree if they drill too many sap holes around its trunk, although this is quite uncommon. The persistent and conspicuous calls and drumming of Red-naped Sapsuckers are commonly heard in early spring.	Red-naped Sapsuckers are omnivores and feed on sap, insects, and fruits.  During the nesting season they take more insects, and they feed insects to their young.	Common in Kittitas County in relatively open forests from lower tree line to Cascade crest. Often nests and feeds in deciduous trees within conifer zones, especially riparian corridors. Spills over Cascade crest into eastern King County, where uncommon and local at high elevation. More generalized habitat requirements than Williamson's Sapsucker reflected in more widespread distribution. Highly migratory; entire population leaves by early fall. Migrants occasionally show up in westside lowlands, most often in spring. Sometimes interbreeds with Red-breasted Sapsucker near crest.	Red-naped sapsuckers form monogamous pairs.  They typically nest in healthy aspen trees or dead conifers.  Both members of the pair excavate the nest cavity. Nest trees are often reused, but a new nest cavity is excavated most years.  The nest is lined with woodchips from the excavation but no other lining.  Both members of the pair incubate the 5 to 6 eggs for 12 to 13 days.  Both feed the young, which leave the nest after 25 to 29 days and are dependent on the parents for about 10 days more.  Red-naped Sapsuckers typically raise a single brood each year.	One of the most strongly migratory woodpeckers, the Red-naped Sapsucker travels as far south as central Mexico for the winter.	red-naped_sapsucker	RNSA			
418	47	Sphyrapicus	ruber	Red-breasted Sapsucker	Fairly common resident west. Rare east.	LC	Red-breasted Sapsuckers are considered a keystone species, because many other species use the sap wells they drill.  Their numbers may have declined because of habitat degradation, but these sapsuckers are still fairly numerous, and the Breeding Bird Survey has identified a non-significant annual increase in Washington since 1966.  In the Cascades they hybridize with Red-naped Sapsuckers.	Red-breasted Sapsuckers are similar in appearance to the closely related Red-naped Sapsuckers, but they have red heads and breasts.  Their upperparts are black barred with white, and they have a prominent white stripe across each black wing. They lack the black breast-band of the other two sapsucker species found in Washington, and they have yellowish bellies.  Males and females look much alike.  Juveniles are mottled brown but have white wing-stripes like the adults.		1	The dense mixed and conifer forests typical of western Washington are the preferred breeding habitat of Red-breasted Sapsuckers. They are often found in mature and old-growth forests, but will breed in second growth as long as there are some large nesting trees. They can also be found in riparian habitats with large cottonwoods.	Red-breasted Sapsuckers are common breeders in appropriate habitat west of, and just beyond, the Cascade crest, to the outer coast.  They are rare breeders in conifer forests east of the Cascades and may be rare breeders in residential areas or city parks in western Washington. Wintering birds can be found in the western Washington lowlands. They are extremely rare winter visitors to eastern Washington.	Sapsuckers get their name from their foraging strategy, which consists of drilling neat horizontal rows of holes into tree trunks and then returning to those holes later to feed on the running sap and the insects attracted to it.  Unlike most woodpeckers, they forage in healthy trees and can actually kill a tree if they drill too many sap-holes around its trunk, although this is quite uncommon.	The main food of Red-breasted Sapsuckers is tree sap. They also eat some insects and fruit.  They take more insects during the nesting season, and they feed insects to their young.	Locally common in mixed and coniferous forests of King and Kitsap Counties. Rare in Island County with just two Whidbey Island records. Fairly common locally in moist conifer forests of western Kittitas County, rarely into drier forests farther east. Sometimes pairs with Red-naped Sapsucker, particularly along crest on Kittitas side; hybrids observed with some regularity. Requires suitably large tree in relatively intact forest for nesting, hence mostly extirpated as breeder from developed urban and suburban areas.	Much is not well known about the nesting behaviors of Red-breasted Sapsuckers.  They form monogamous pairs, and both members of the pair excavate the nest cavity.  Nests are usually built in deciduous trees, such as aspen, alder, cottonwood, or willow, but they may also be in firs or other conifers. The nest is often high, 50-60 feet off the ground.  Both sexes typically incubate the 5 to 6 eggs for 12 to 13 days.  Both feed the young, which leave the nest after 25 to 29 days.  The young are probably dependent on the parents for ten days or so thereafter.  Red-breasted Sapsuckers typically raise a single brood each year.	Red-breasted Sapsuckers are the least migratory of Washington's sapsuckers and the only sapsuckers that regularly occur in Washington during the winter.  If the weather turns cold enough for sap to freeze, they may descend into the lowlands or move out to the outer coast to find food.	red-breasted_sapsucker	RBSA			
419	47	Sphyrapicus	thyroideus	Williamson's Sapsucker	Uncommon summer resident east.	LC	Williamson's Sapsuckers are considered a keystone species, because many other species use the sap wells they drill.  Forest management tends to limit the availability of nest sites, as these birds prefer trees with soft, decayed centers for nesting, trees that are often removed from managed forests.  Audubon~Washington lists them as a species-at-risk.  The Breeding Bird Survey reports strong declines in the Pacific Northwest in recent years, but its data are difficult to interpret because few survey routes go through the breeding range of the Williamson's Sapsucker.  Formerly they were encountered only very infrequently in Washington, but a more thorough understanding of their breeding requirements has made them easier to find.	The largest of Washington's sapsuckers, Williamson's Sapsuckers are striking birds.  Males and females look very different from each other, and until 1873 they were mistakenly believed to be of different species.  The upperparts of males are solid black. They have a large white rump patch and a large, showy white patch on each wing.  Males have yellow bellies, bright red throats and black breasts.  Their heads bear a white moustache line and white eye-line.  The backs and wings of females are finely barred with light and dark brown. Like males, females have yellow bellies, black breast-bands, and white rumps, but their wings have no white wing-patches.  Females' heads are brown, without conspicuous stripes. Juvenile plumage is mostly barred and mottled brown, without conspicuous markings.		1	Williamson's Sapsuckers breed in dry, open, conifer forests in mountainous regions, especially along rivers and in areas with western larch.  They appear to be most successful in conifer forests with many different species of trees.  During their migration they use a wide variety of habitats, and in winter they often use broadleaved forests, especially along rivers and streams.	From April through September, Williamson's Sapsuckers are uncommon breeders east of the Cascade crest. They are to be found most commonly in the Okanogan and Methow Valleys at elevations of 3,000 feet and above, especially in larch forests.  Stampede Pass and Colockum Pass (Kittitas County) are other good locations. They are fairly common in the Okanogan Highlands and the eastern side of the Blue Mountains.	Sapsuckers get their name from their foraging strategy of drilling holes in tree trunks, and then coming back to those holes later to feed on the running sap and the insects attracted to that sap.  Unlike most woodpeckers, they forage in healthy trees and can actually kill a tree if they drill too many sap-holes around its trunk, although this is quite uncommon.  Williamson's Sapsuckers also chip bark from trees to get to insects boring beneath.  Their flight is deeply undulating. Although they are typically described as quiet and inconspicuous, they make loud, cat-like mewing calls, which may reveal their presence.  They frequently sunbathe, facing away from the sun with their wings extended, tails spread, crown feathers raised, and heads held back.	Williamson's Sapsuckers are omnivores and feed on sap, insects, and fruits.  During the nesting season they eat mostly ants, and they feed ants to their young.	Uncommon in Kittitas County from moderate to relatively high elevations in stands of mature pine, Douglas-fir, larch, and quaking aspen. Records concentrated in two areas separated by Yakima River Valley: eastern Wenatchee Mountains from upper Teanaway drainage to Colockum Pass, and in south county around Manastash Ridge. Mapped BBA distribution nicely corroborates that predicted by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997).	Williamson's Sapsuckers form monogamous pairs, a bird often pairing with its mate from a previous year. They typically nest in larch or aspens with dead heartwood but a solid outer layer.  The male excavates a new nest cavity every year.  The nest is lined with woodchips from the excavation but no other lining.  Both sexes typically incubate the 4 to 6 eggs for 12 to 14 days, and both brood the young for the first week after they hatch.  Both feed the young, which leave the nest after 31 to 32 days and may disperse soon after they leave.  Williamson's Sapsucker pairs usually raise a single brood each year.	In areas where sap freezes, Williamson's Sapsuckers are complete migrants, traveling in flocks to the American Southwest and Mexico for the winter.  Females tend to migrate farther south than males.	williamsons_sapsucker				
420	47	Sphyrapicus	varius	Yellow-bellied Sapsucker		LC		Accidental in winter east and west. Reports increasing.		1								yellow-bellied_sapsucker				
421	12	Spiza	americana	Dickcissel		LC		One June record from Grant County, four fall-winter records from western Washington.		1								dickcissel				
422	42	Spizella	arborea	American Tree Sparrow	Uncommon winter resident.	LC	Most of the American Tree Sparrow's nesting area is remote from human disturbance and well protected, although large-scale development in the far north may threaten this species.  On the wintering grounds, residential gardening practices such as clearing underbrush, removing weeds, and cutting grass reduce the food supply, but feeding stations often make up for this and American Tree Sparrows have adapted well to living in suburban environments and are currently considered abundant.	The American Tree Sparrow is a small sparrow with a long notched tail.  The adult has a streaked back and wings, with two white wing bars, but is otherwise unstreaked, while the juvenile is streaky overall.  Adults have an unstreaked gray-brown breast and belly, with a dark spot in the center.  The tail, rump, and nape of the neck are all solid gray.  The upper mandible of the bill is dark and the lower is yellow.  The head is mostly gray, with a rufous crown and eye-line.		1	The American Tree Sparrow is actually not closely associated with trees.  Its breeding habitat is in the far north, in the shrubby tundra beyond the tree-line. In winter and during migration, they inhabit a variety of open habitats, including dry grassland, sagebrush desert, and farmland.  They can also be found in woodlands bordering rivers, shrubby thickets and other weedy edges, and yards with birdfeeders.	Mostly an eastern Washington species, the American Tree Sparrow is found in Washington only during the winter.  It is locally uncommon in eastern Washington from October to March, with some birds lingering into early April.  In western Washington, it is locally uncommon to rare in scattered areas, including Bellingham (Whatcom County), Camano Island (Island County), Snoqualmie and Snohomish River valleys, Skagit River delta, and Monroe (Snohomish County). Look for it in deciduous trees and brush along edges and watercourses in relatively open habitat.	Outside of the nesting season, Tree Sparrows are usually found foraging in flocks in low bushes or on the ground.  In snowy fields, they will beat tall weeds with their wings and collect the fallen seeds from atop the snow.	Seeds, insects, and berries make up most of the American Tree Sparrow's diet.  In winter, they eat primarily seeds and berries, while in summer their diet shifts to insects, especially when feeding young.		The male defends a territory, and the monogamous pair forms shortly after the birds arrive on the breeding grounds.  The nest is an open cup of twigs, grass, and moss, often lined with ptarmigan feathers and other fine material.  It is situated on the ground, on grass clumps or hummocks in the open tundra.  The female incubates the 4-6 eggs for 12-13 days.  Both parents feed the young who leave the nest after 8-10 days and can fly at two weeks of age.  The parents continue to feed the young for about two weeks after they leave the nest.	American Tree Sparrows are complete migrants, meaning there is no overlap between breeding and wintering range.  Migration is late in the fall and early in the spring, with the birds spending the breeding season in the far north.	american_tree_sparrow				
423	42	Spizella	breweri	Brewer's Sparrow	Common summer resident east.	LC	This species is adapted to fire climax ecosystems, that is, areas that depend on forest fires to maintain ecological balance.  Brewer's Sparrow populations decrease immediately after a fire, but increase about three seasons later.  They used to be regular breeders in eastern Washington in the Palouse region, but conversion of much of this land to agriculture has eliminated most of the habitat suitable for Brewer's Sparrows.  The habitat that remains is highly fragmented.  Throughout the species' range, it has been in significant decline for the past two decades.  Numbers are highly variable from year to year, making it difficult to track population trends.  Brewer's Sparrows are included as an at-risk species on the National Audubon watch list, the Partners in Flight watch list, and the Washington Gap Analysis at-risk list.	A plain, small, pale gray bird, the Brewer's Sparrow blends in well with its sagebrush surroundings.  It is the smallest of Washington's sparrows, and has a streaked back, unstreaked breast, and a long tail.  The head markings are subtle.  It has a slightly darker eye-line and streaked crown and a white eye-ring.  Young birds are streaked overall and maintain this plumage through August of their first year.		1	The Brewer's Sparrow is restricted to the shrub-steppe zone of Washington, where it prefers higher elevations (usually above 2600 feet) with higher precipitation levels, and therefore more grass cover than the drier bottomlands.  Areas with abundant bluebunch wheatgrass and other native grasses along with scattered threetip sage are preferred breeding habitats.  After the young fledge, Brewer's Sparrows spread across the shrub-steppe zone and can be found anywhere throughout the shrub-steppe until they migrate south.	Brewer's Sparrows are common in the Columbia Basin and Okanogan Valley, especially on north slopes of east-west ridges such as Yakima, Umtanum, and Horse Heaven Ridges.  They are present, but less common, in the Methow Valley and southern Columbia Basin.  A small breeding population exists in remnant patches of habitat in Asotin County.  They are local and rare in isolated grassland patches in the Spokane Valley (Spokane County) and Little Pend Oreille National Wildlife Refuge (Stevens County).	Brewer's Sparrows are sometimes found in flocks, especially after the young fledge.  They forage on the ground and in low shrubs.  The song is beautiful and distinctive.	Brewer's Sparrows can survive for an extended period of time with no supplemental water, getting all the water they need from their diet of seeds and arthropods.  In the spring and summer, they eat and feed their young many insects.  In late summer and through the winter, seeds become more important.	In our area, found only in Kittitas County where common in shrub-steppe at low to moderate elevation. Generally most abundant in healthy tracts of big sagebrush with native bunchgrass groundcover. Predicted breeding range northward along Columbia from Vantage to Chelan County, mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997), not confirmed by BBA records. Gap report also extends core breeding range to include north and west edges of Kittitas Valley, but this prediction only weakly supported by scattered records at possible level.	The male sings to defend his territory and attract a mate.  The pair forms a monogamous bond that lasts through the breeding season.  Nests are well hidden in the shrub canopy, usually within four feet of the bare ground.  The male may help gather material, but the female builds the nest, which is a compact, open cup made of grasses, weeds, twigs, and rootlets, lined with fine plants and hair.  The female incubates the 3-4 eggs for 10-12 days.  Both parents brood and feed the young, who leave the nest at 7-9 days old.  The parents continue to feed the young for a few days after they fledge. Many pairs raise two broods a year.	Brewer's Sparrows arrive in Washington in early April.  By early September, virtually all have departed for desert scrub in the southwestern US and northern Mexico.	brewers_sparrow				
424	42	Spizella	pallida	Clay-colored Sparrow	Rare summer east, winter west.	LC	The Breeding Bird Survey suggests that Clay-colored Sparrows are the most numerous low-shrub songbird of the northern prairies, especially in Canada. In the past 20 years, however, there has been a small, but significant decline in breeding populations across much of their range, which is most likely due to the increased development in many of these areas. They are also often parasitized by Brown-headed Cowbirds. Range-wide, Clay-colored Sparrows are a species of special concern and are included on the Partners in Flight watch list.	A small sparrow with a slightly notched tail, the Clay-colored Sparrow is seen regularly in only a few spots in eastern Washington. Buff-gray underparts and a brown rump contrast with streaked wings with two white wing-bars. A clear, gray band runs across the nape of the neck, splitting the streaked head and back. In breeding plumage, the Clay-colored Sparrow has a white stripe over its eye, dark cheek lined with a distinctive black moustache, and white throat-patch with dark bars dividing the patch into three segments. In non-breeding plumage, the closely related Chipping Sparrow is similar in appearance. The Clay-colored can be distinguished from the Chipping by a brown rather than gray rump, lighter face pattern, and a moustache, absent from the Chipping Sparrow. The two species also have distinctive songs and use different habitat, but are sometimes found in mixed flocks in the non-breeding season.		1	This typical summer bird of northern-prairie brushlands is generally found in more open areas than Chipping Sparrows. Clay-colored Sparrows are often found in open grassland and moist steppe zones, in stands of bushes or forest edges.	The first recorded Clay-colored Sparrow in Washington was near Spokane (Spokane County) in 1960. Between 1964 and 1986 there was evidence of breeding at that location during at least eight seasons, and between 1994 and 1996, one or two breeding pairs were found each year, sometimes with fledglings. The Clay-colored Sparrow is a rare and local breeder east of Spokane. While Spokane is the only area with confirmed breeding, Clay-colored Sparrows are also found in a few scattered places in the northern part of the state, in Okanogan and Ferry Counties. There is one breeding-season record in western Washington, from 1995 in Olympia (Thurston County). Fall and winter sightings (mostly winter) in western Washington are becoming more common, with one or two birds seen each year with flocks of White-crowned and Golden-crowned Sparrows.	Males often perch atop low thickets, singing. Outside of the nesting season, they forage on the ground in flocks, often mixed with Chipping and other sparrows. Unlike most songbirds, Clay-colored Sparrows forage outside of their nesting territory, leaving them with smaller territories to defend than most songbirds their size. They can occasionally be found with other sparrows, including White-crowned and Golden-crowned Sparrows. The Clay-colored Sparrow has a buzzy, insect-like song that is easily distinguished from the Chipping Sparrow's dry trill.	The Clay-colored Sparrow primarily eats the seeds of weeds and grasses. In the summer, the young birds especially favor insects.		Males arrive and start establishing territories on the nesting grounds a few days before females return. The males sing to defend their territories and attract females. The birds form monogamous pairs that last through the breeding season. Nests are generally located on the ground or in a low shrub, within five feet of the ground. The female builds an open-cup nest of grass, weeds, and twigs, lined with rootlets, fine grass, and hair. Each clutch typically has four eggs, and the female does most of the incubation. The male does some incubating and feeds the female during the 10 to 14 days of incubation. Once the young hatch, both parents help feed them. After 7 to 9 days, the young leave the nest. Unable to fly, they hop to the ground and immediately run for cover. The parents continue to feed and tend the young for about another week, after which the young can fly and find their own food.	Clay-colored Sparrows are complete migrants, meaning there is no overlap between summer and winter ranges. They typically migrate in flocks through the Great Plains to southern Texas and Mexico. Wanderers are found in the fall from the Atlantic to the Pacific Coasts. In these cases, the wandering Clay-colored Sparrows are usually found with Chipping or Brewer's Sparrows.	clay-colored_sparrow				
425	42	Spizella	passerina	Chipping Sparrow	Common summer east. Fairly common west.	LC	Although the Chipping Sparrow is still common and widespread across its range, its population has ebbed and flowed as a result of human influences.  Originally, the Chipping Sparrow was probably not a common species, but may have benefited from European settlement.  The population peaked in the 1850s, when it was the most common city sparrow.  Since the 1900s, Chipping Sparrow populations have been declining due to habitat loss, Brown-headed Cowbird parasitism, and competition with House Sparrows and House Finches.  The population is still likely to be greater than it was before European settlement.  In Washington, Chipping Sparrows are common east of the Cascades, but declining in the San Juan Islands and on the Olympic Peninsula due to loss of prairie habitat and increase in Brown-headed Cowbird parasitism.  According to the Breeding Bird Survey, Chipping Sparrows have experienced a significant decline statewide since 1966.  The Washington Gap Analysis Project considers them an at-risk species in this state.	The Chipping Sparrow is a small sparrow with a slightly notched tail and--during the breeding season--a distinctive russet cap.  Gray underparts and a gray rump contrast with streaked wings with two white wing bars.  A clear, gray band runs across the nape of its neck, splitting the brown- and black-streaked head and back.  In breeding plumage, the Chipping Sparrow has a white stripe over its eye with a dark stripe below it, a gray cheek, and a lighter throat patch.  Juveniles are streaked and, while some molt earlier, most Washington birds keep their juvenile plumage through the fall migration.  In non-breeding plumage, the closely related Clay-colored Sparrow is similar in appearance.  The Clay-colored can be distinguished from the Chipping by a brown, rather than gray, rump, a darker face pattern, and the absence of a moustache.  The two species also use different habitats, but are sometimes found in mixed flocks in the non-breeding season.		1	A sparrow of dry, open forests, the Chipping Sparrow is well adapted for suburban environments, although they are less common in the suburbs in Washington than in other parts of the country.  In Washington, they are found in open forest edges and clearings (especially Ponderosa pine), wooded parks, orchards, gardens, and in Ponderosa pine patches in steppe zones.  They are also common in trees near agricultural fields, although in these areas, their productivity is reduced by Brown-headed Cowbird parasitism.	Chipping Sparrows are common in open pine forests and other appropriate habitat throughout eastern Washington.  They are uncommon in western Washington, with a patchy distribution often closely tied to stands of oak (Quercus spp.).  In western Washington, they are most commonly found around Fort Lewis and other forest clearings in Pierce, Thurston, and southwest King Counties.  The open, grassy farmlands in southwest Washington provide good habitat, and some Chipping Sparrows can be seen in Clark County.  Similar habitat in the San Juan Islands sustains a population that is currently common, but declining.  On the Olympic Peninsula, they are uncommon from Hurricane Ridge to Dungeness.  They are also found in the western Cascades at higher elevations.  In other parts of western Washington, they are rare.	Chipping Sparrows forage in flocks, except during the breeding season.  They usually forage on or near the ground in open areas near cover.  When foraging, they run or hop, stopping often to scratch the ground for seed.  The Chipping Sparrow's song is a uniform trill.  Its call is a hard chip.	The Chipping Sparrow eats mostly seeds, especially in the fall and winter.  During the breeding season, they eat a number of crawling insects as well.	Common breeder in dry, open forests of Kittitas County. Locally common in forest clearings in extreme northeastern and southeastern King County. Fairly common but local in Kitsap County. BBA records from Whidbey Island and lowland King County all from late May, and probably represent overshoots from core western Washington breeding area in Fort Lewis Prairies or migrants en route to more northerly breeding grounds.	Males return to the breeding area a week or so before the females, and begin to establish territories.  When the females return, pair bonds form.  Although monogamy is common, some males may have more than one mate.  The male and female choose a nest site together, usually in a conifer, within 15 feet of the ground.  The female builds the nest, a loose, open cup made of grass, weeds, and rootlets, lined with hair and fine grass.  It is often situated at the outer end of a branch in a clump of needles or leaves.  The female incubates 4 eggs for 10 to 12 days.  The male feeds the female while she incubates.  Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest 9 to 12 days after hatching.  The young can make sustained flights within three days of leaving the nest, although the parents continue to feed them for about three more weeks.  Second broods are not uncommon, but most pairs raise only one brood a season.	Northern populations of Chipping Sparrows (including those that breed in Washington) migrate, wintering across the southern US into Mexico.  Migration is often in flocks and usually spread out over a long period in both the fall and spring.  Birds leave in August on the west side, and in early September on the east side of the Cascades.  Returning birds arrive in April.	chipping_sparrow	CHSP			
426	28	Stelgidopteryx	serripennis	Northern Rough-winged Swallow	Fairly common summer resident.	LC	According to the Breeding Bird Survey, the population of Northern Rough-winged Swallows has declined in Washington since 1966 (although the decline is not statistically significant). However, since Northern Rough-winged Swallows are patchily distributed, they might not be accurately counted by the methods employed by the Breeding Bird Survey. River flooding and cattle grazing, both of which cause stream erosion, have exposed many sandy banks suitable for nesting, and increased development in Washington has created more artificial nest sites as well. As the populations of most cavity-nesting species tend to be limited by the availability of cavities, the abundance of potential nest sites should bode well for the Northern Rough-winged Swallow.	The name, 'Rough-winged,' refers to the tiny serrations on the outermost wing feathers of this swallow, visible only when the bird is in the hand. Adults are plain brown above with a white belly and buffy throat and upper breast. They have square tails and white under-tail coverts, sometimes visible from above on the sides of their rumps when the bird is in flight. Juveniles are similar in appearance to adults but have reddish-brown wing-bars. Northern Rough-winged Swallows can be confused with Bank Swallows, but Bank Swallows have distinct breast-bands and white throats, with some white wrapping back to their ears.  Northern Rough winged Swallows have shorter tails than those of Bank Swallows.  Northern Rough-winged Swallows are also broader-winged and stockier than Bank Swallows.  Bank Swallows have backs and rumps that are paler than their wings. Consult a field guide or experienced observer for assistance in identification.		1	Northern Rough-winged Swallows are usually found at lower elevations near water, especially along sandy, coastal cliffs or rivers with high, sandy banks and nearby open areas. They also nest in man-made banks. They are the principal bank-nesting swallow in western Washington. In eastern Washington, their habitat overlaps almost completely with Bank Swallows, although Bank Swallows are more restricted to the Columbia Basin.	Northern Rough-winged Swallows are common from mid-April through August at lower elevations throughout Washington were there is appropriate nesting habitat nearby, especially around farms and the floodplains of major rivers.	Northern Rough-winged Swallows generally do not gather in large flocks. Like other swallows, Northern Rough-winged Swallows are aerial foragers, flying low over open water, fields, and narrow gullies. They feed over water more than most swallows, and sometimes pluck food from the water's surface. Northern Rough-winged Swallows have a distinctive slow and deliberate wing-beat.	Northern Rough-winged Swallows feed almost exclusively on flying insects.	Locally common but thinly distributed throughout, usually near water at low and moderate elevations. Excavates nest burrows in sandy banks. May be found along coastal sandy bluffs, but more common along rivers with high banks.	Northern Rough-winged Swallows usually nest in small colonies of a few pairs, occasionally as isolated pairs. Where their range overlaps with that of Bank Swallows, they can often be found on the outskirts of Bank Swallow colonies. They usually nest in burrows in sandy, vertical banks. They may dig their own burrows, from one to six feet long, or use burrows dug by Bank Swallows, kingfishers, or ground squirrels.  Sometimes they nest in pipes, crevices, or holes in buildings. Their bulky nests are made of twigs, weeds, and fibers of bark, lined with grass and sometimes horse manure. The female incubates five to seven eggs for 12 to 16 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest after 19 to 20 days. The parents continue to feed the young for a few days after they leave the nest.	Medium-distance migrants, Northern Rough-winged Swallows typically migrate in flocks of mixed swallow species to Mexico and Central America. They arrive in Washington in April and leave in the late summer, soon after the young fledge. Because both fall and spring migrations extend over many weeks, large concentrations of migrants are unusual.	northern_rough-winged_swallow	NRWS			
427	65	Stellula	calliope	Calliope Hummingbird	Fairly common summer resident east. Rare west.	LC	The use of feeders may have an impact on the population and could potentially result in a range expansion.  Since Calliope Hummingbirds use edges and forest openings, they respond positively in the short term to logging, which opens up gaps in the canopy, allowing flowers to grow.  Breeding Bird Survey results indicate a decline in numbers in Washington, but the BBS recognizes that there are important deficiencies in their data for Calliope Hummingbirds.	The Calliope Hummingbird is the smallest of Washington's hummingbirds, and in fact, is the smallest bird that breeds north of Mexico. Body coloring is green above and buff-gray below. The short, square tail is green at the base, with a black band in males. In females, the black band is tipped with white. Adult males have a pink-streaked iridescent throat-patch that can be held erect.		1	Calliope Hummingbirds are found in northwestern montane environments. They breed in mixed brush-land, forest edges, and openings. The majority of breeders in Washington can be found in the Ponderosa pine zone, although they are found higher as well.	Calliope Hummingbirds are commonly found on the east side of the Cascades in brush-lands, dry open forests (especially Ponderosa pine), meadows, and openings at mid- to high elevations.  In western Washington, they can be found breeding along the upper Skagit River near Newhalem (Whatcom County).  Non-breeders and migrants can be found above the treeline, west of the Cascades, and in the Columbia Basin. Look for them in mountain meadows when the flowers are in bloom.	They tend to perch and forage closer to the ground than other hummingbirds. The male conducts an aerial display consisting of a series of swooping flights. At the bottom of a U-shaped dive, the male makes a two-part sound, produced by a combination of vocalizations and feathers. During courtship, the male hovers in front of and above the female, producing a loud buzz. Sometimes the pair will go into an aerial dance, circling around each other, a constant distance apart. Like many hummingbirds, they are highly territorial during the breeding season. Calliope Hummingbirds make mechanical buzzing and twittering sounds, both vocally and with their wings.  Their vocalizations are, however, quieter than those of many other hummingbirds.	The Calliope Hummingbird feeds on nectar from flowers and feeders. It catches insects in flight and uses sapsucker holes to feed on sap and insects attracted to the sap.	Fairly common from lower tree line to middle elevations in brushlands and dry, open forests of Kittitas County; uncommon and local in higher forests up to mountain passes. Core range ponderosa pine zone. Birds found near Cascade crest may not be breeding.	Calliope Hummingbirds do not form extended pair bonds.  The female builds the nest, incubates the eggs, and feeds the young on her own.  The male provides no parental care.  Nest height varies from 2 to 65 feet above the ground. Typically built in a conifer, often near cones or knots or on an old cone base, the nest can easily be mistaken for a cone.  Situated on a small branch, often below a larger one, the nest is protected from the elements.  The female incubates two eggs for 15-16 days.  She feeds and cares for the young by herself until they become independent at 18-21 days.	The Calliope Hummingbird is the smallest long-distance avian migrant in the world.  It winters in central Mexico and arrives in Washington from late April to mid-May.  Adult males may wander a bit in late summer, and typically migrate south before females and young born that year.	calliope_hummingbird				
428	59	Stercorarius	longicaudus	Long-tailed Jaeger	Uncommon pelagic migrant.	LC	The Long-tailed Jaeger is the most abundant and widespread jaeger in the Arctic.  Although local breeding populations fluctuate with the food supply, overall numbers appear stable.	The Long-tailed Jaeger is the smallest jaeger, with a slender body and narrow wings.  During the breeding season, the adult has long central tail feathers that extend 5-10 beyond the rest of the tail, but from August to November, these are often broken or missing.  The breeding adult has grayish upperparts contrasting with darker secondaries, a whitish head and underparts, a blackish-brown cap, and a yellow cast to the sides of its neck.  The underwing lacks a white patch.  Dark phases are very rare in adults.  The non-breeding adult (November to March) has a cap flecked with white and gray, and underparts (except the wing) barred with brown and white.  It lacks long central tail feathers. Juveniles and immatures have both light and dark phases, but light is more common.  In general, they have brown and white barring on underwing coverts, flanks, and uppertail and undertail coverts.  In other parts of the world, jaegers are known as skuas.		1	Breeding birds are found both near the coast and farther inland on sparsely vegetated, dry Arctic tundra.  At other times of the year, Long-tailed Jaegers are highly pelagic, usually at least ten miles from land.  They often spend time on offshore banks, in areas with schools of small fish near the surface, and near commercial fishing vessels.	Long-tailed Jaegers are usually more than ten miles from land, so an offshore boat trip is usually necessary to find them.  However, they are occasionally seen from land, particularly at Point No Point (Kitsap County), or at spots along the outer coast.	Although Long-tailed Jaegers usually migrate singly over the open ocean, small numbers may congregate around fishing vessels during the non-breeding season. They often hunt rodents by hovering like kestrels and swooping down on them. They will steal prey from other seabirds, but not as frequently as Parasitic and Pomarine Jaegers. Long-tailed Jaegers are the most agile and graceful of the jaegers, and the least aggressive.  On their breeding grounds, pairs advertise and defend large territories with a variety of aerial displays.  The Long-tailed Jaeger is generally silent away from breeding grounds.	Little is known about their diet at sea, but it includes fish, crustaceans, and polychaete worms.  During the breeding season, they eat mostly lemmings and voles.		Long-tailed Jaegers for monogamous long-term pair bonds. Both sexes build the nest, a shallow depression often on a slightly raised area.  They are limited to 2 eggs because, while incubating, they hold an egg between one foot and its corresponding brood patch.  Females incubate more than males.  Chicks stay in the nest 1-2 days after hatching.  One parent, usually the female, remains near the nest while the other one forages.  Typically, the male brings food back, regurgitates, and the female feeds the young.  Young often remain with their parents for 1-3 weeks after fledging, which occurs at 22-27 days.	Long-tailed Jaegers are found off the Washington coast during fall migration from July to October. They are rare in spring migration.  Peak migration is in August and September.  They breed in Arctic Alaska, Canada, and Greenland, and winter at sea south of the Equator.  They begin arriving on breeding grounds the last week of May or first week of June.	long-tailed_jaeger				
429	59	Stercorarius	maccormicki	South Polar Skua	Rare pelagic migrant.	LC	Numbers appear to be stable, and the remoteness of their range makes the South Polar Skua relatively safe from human impacts.	The South Polar Skua looks like a bulky, broad-winged gull with a short, wedge-shaped tail.  Adults have both dark and light morphs.  The light morph is pale gray on the head, neck, and underparts.  The upperparts are darker, with narrow, whitish streaks.  The dark morph is uniformly dark grayish-brown above with a pale yellowish nape.  Juveniles are darker than light-morph adults and range from dark brown to dark gray.  In flight, the South Polar Skua has a hunchbacked appearance, blackish underwing coverts, and a white patch in the primaries.		1	Away from their breeding grounds, South Polar Skuas are highly pelagic.  They occur far offshore over warm or cold waters, especially near fishing vessels, small schooling fishes, and offshore shallows, but may occasionally be seen closer to land.  They nest on barren ground in Antarctica.	South Polar Skuas are usually observed more than 10 miles from shore, so an offshore boat trip is the best, if not only, way to find them.	South Polar Skuas forage by plunging into the water for fish, seizing prey on the surface, or by stealing prey from other seabirds.  They may actually grab and violently shake other birds to force them to disgorge their food.  South Polar Skuas are powerful and fast in flight.  They are generally silent away from their breeding grounds.	Their diet consists mainly of fish for most of the year.  On their breeding grounds, they nest close to penguin colonies where they feed on the eggs and the young.  When they overlap with the larger Brown Skuas, which control penguin colonies, South Polar Skuas are forced to forage at sea.		South Polar Skuas begin breeding at 5-6 years, and keep the same mate and nest site year after year.  The male begins the simple nest scrape in soil or moss, and the female finishes it.  The female usually lays 2 eggs and both sexes incubate, the female more than the male.  Both parents feed the young by regurgitation.  The young are able to leave the nest soon after hatching, but remain in the vicinity of the nest.  Usually only one chick survives to fledging, which occurs at 49-59 days.	South Polar Skuas migrate from the Southern Hemisphere into the northern Pacific Ocean in a clockwise loop from Japan to North America.  Off Washington, peak migration occurs from late August to early October, although birds have been spotted as early as mid-May.	south_polar_skua				
430	59	Stercorarius	parasiticus	Parasitic Jaeger	Fairly common coastal and pelagic migrant.	LC	There is no evidence of major changes in numbers, and the breeding range of the Parasitic Jaeger is relatively free from human encroachment.	The Parasitic Jaeger (known in most of the world as the Arctic Skua) is medium in size between the smaller Long-tailed Jaeger and larger Pomarine Jaeger.  Its plumage is highly variable, with light, intermediate, and dark morphs.  Light morphs have brown upperparts with a blackish cap and white collar, white underparts, and yellowish sides of the neck.  They often have a partial or complete breast band.  Dark morphs have brown underparts and head.  All morphs have a white patch on the underwing and pointed central tail feathers that extend beyond the rest of the tail.  These long tail feathers are lost during the non-breeding season.  Juvenile and immature plumage also varies from light to dark.  In general, except for dark morphs, juveniles and immatures have an orangish-brown or cinnamon wash on the head and neck, and barring on the back.		1	During migration, Parasitic Jaegers are more often found near shore and in estuaries than other jaegers.  They spend most of the year on the ocean within a few miles of land.  They nest on Arctic tundra, often near a body of water.	Parasitic Jaegers may be seen in coastal areas such as bays and estuaries, especially where gulls and terns are plentiful. Point No Point (Kitsap County) is usually a reliable place to locate them.  They are rarely found inland but have been recorded in the Walla Walla River delta in late summer. An excellent way to locate them is to carefully observe flocks of Bonaparte's Gulls, Common Terns, etc.	They are often seen in association with flocks of small gulls and terns. Parasitic Jaegers are agile in flight, and they often forage by chasing other seabirds and forcing them to drop their prey (kleptoparasitism).  Breeding pairs defend large territories where they often cooperate in hunting birds, eggs, and rodents.  On breeding grounds where the primary source of food is kleptoparasitism, territories are small and pairs nest in loose colonies.	During the breeding season they eat a variety of birds and their eggs, rodents, insects, and berries.  Non-breeders eat mostly fish stolen from other birds.  Parasitic Jaegers are less dependent on lemming populations than are other jaegers.		Pairs usually return to the same territory each year.  Males tend to arrive earlier to reclaim territory.  The male chooses the nest site, which is often on a slight rise away from cover.  The female builds the nest, a shallow depression sometimes lined with grass or lichens.  Both sexes share incubation of the 2 eggs.  The young may leave the nest within 2 days after hatching, but remain nearby.  The parents feed the young by regurgitating food.  The young stay with their parents for a few weeks after fledging, which occurs at 25-30 days.	Migrants occur off Washington from August to November and April to June.  The spring migration is shorter and less pronounced than fall.  In the Pacific, Parasitic Jaegers winter at sea from southern California to southern Chile and Australia.  They often migrate near the coast, but also farther at sea and over land.  They breed from western Arctic Alaska and the Aleutian Islands to north-central Canada and Greenland.  Migrants usually travel singly or in small groups, and they may come close to shore to steal food from gulls and terns.	parasitic_jaeger	PAJA			
431	59	Stercorarius	pomarinus	Pomarine Jaeger	Fairly common pelagic migrant.	LC	Local breeding numbers vary with lemming population cycles, making numbers difficult to monitor.  However, there is no evidence of major declines.  Their breeding range is remote from human impacts, but the highly specialized reproductive ecology of Pomarine Jaegers makes them potentially vulnerable to human disturbance.	The Pomarine Jaeger is the largest of the jaegers.  Adults have long central tail feathers that are twisted 90 degrees, but these are usually lost after the breeding season, in mid- to late summer.  Pomarine, Greek for 'lid-nosed', refers to the sheath that covers the base of the bill.  The large, bi-colored bill contrasts with the dark face.  Adults and juveniles have light and dark morphs, but 90% of the adults are light.  The light morph has a blackish cap and dark brown upperparts, white underparts and collar, a yellow wash on the sides of neck, and a bold brown band across the breast.  The dark morph is similar except the underparts, sides of the neck, and collar are entirely dark brown.  Juveniles are brown with uniform head and neck and strongly barred coverts on the tail and underwing.  In other parts of the world, jaegers are known as skuas.		1	When they are not breeding, Pomarine Jaegers are highly pelagic.  They winter in productive regions of tropical and subtropical oceans, and concentrate over upwellings and boundaries of currents.  They may be seen around large fishing vessels where they steal food from other seabirds.  Their Arctic breeding grounds are on low-lying, wet, coastal tundra.	Pomarine Jaegers are usually seen only far from shore, but they occasionally occur in estuaries and beaches, particularly after storms.  An offshore boat trip in the fall is the best bet for finding them.	Pomarine Jaegers forage by taking fish from the surface or diving, scavenging, preying on smaller birds, and stealing prey from other seabirds (kleptoparasitism).  During the breeding season, they forage over land by hovering and swooping down on lemmings.  They may be nomadic during the breeding season, in search of areas with high lemming densities.  They sometimes dig to find lemming nests. Breeding pairs defend large territories for nesting and foraging.  They migrate singly or in small groups.  Pomarine Jaegers are powerful and fast in flight.	Their diet includes fish, smaller birds, carrion, and refuse.  Breeders rely on lemmings for successful reproduction.		Arrival in breeding areas depends on lemming densities.  Adults often form pairs, occasionally with their old mates, before establishing territories.  Both sexes build the nest, a depression they form by trampling the ground with their breasts and feet.  The female usually lays 2 eggs, and both parents incubate.  The young are able to leave the nest within two days after hatching, but stay near the nest where their parents feed them pieces of lemmings.  The young are dependent on parents for food for two more weeks after fledging, which occurs at 21-27 days.  The parents leave the breeding area as soon as young reach independence.	Off Washington, the Pomarine Jaeger is the most abundant jaeger in the fall.  It occurs from mid-July to mid-October.  Spring migration is from late April to early June.  It breeds from northern Alaska to the north-central Arctic, and winters at sea from southern California to Peru.	pomarine_jaeger				
432	32	Sterna	forsteri	Forster's Tern	Fairly common summer east. Casual west.	LC	Destruction of wetlands has led to declines in some areas. Recreational boating on nesting lakes, which can flood nests, may also have a negative impact on populations of Forster's Terns.	The Forster's Tern is similar looking to the Common Tern, but found in slightly different habitat. In breeding plumage, it has a light gray mantle with silvery-white primaries. Its long, light tail is deeply forked, and its undersides are all white.  The wings appear very light, silvery gray in flight. It has a black cap, commonly found in terns. The bill is orange-red with a black tip, and the legs are orange-red'both more orange than those of the Common Tern. The adult in non-breeding plumage lacks the black cap. Black markings over the eyes, extending back to the ears, give the bird a distinctly masked look. The bill is black, and the wingtips are grayer than in breeding plumage. Juvenile birds have a significant amount of brown wash on their feathers, but this usually disappears by August.		1	Forster's Terns typically inhabit fresh and saltwater marshes in the summer. During migration and in winter, they can be found in a wider variety of aquatic habitat, especially around estuaries, inlets, and bays, but rarely out of sight of land.	The Forster's Tern is found mostly east of the Cascades, although it has been recorded on the west side, often after August. It is common on freshwater habitat from May to mid-August in the Columbia Basin. It breeds from the Potholes region, south along the Columbia River to the Tri-cities area. It is also found farther up the Columbia, although less commonly, to Grant and Adams Counties, and west to Klickitat County.	The Forster's Tern flies and hovers over the water, plunging to take fish from just below the surface. It also forages for flying insects. This tern is aggressive towards other birds near its nest.	Fish make up the majority of the diet in all seasons, but in summer, insects are another major food source. Other aquatic creatures are also taken.	Nests commonly east of Columbia River in Potholes region and near Tri-Cities, preferably on islands and gravel bars. Nesting confirmed at one site in our four-county area, in Kittitas County below Wanapum Dam on Columbia River.	Often nesting atop muskrat houses or on gravel islands, Forster's Terns form loose colonies and sometimes associate with Yellow-headed Blackbird colonies. When Forster's Terns and Black Terns nest in the same marsh, the Forster's Terns choose higher and drier ground for their nests. Both sexes help build the nest, a platform of reeds and grasses, with a hollowed-out center lined with finer materials and shells. Incubation of the 3 eggs is shared by both sexes for 23-25 days. The development of the young is not well known, but both parents help feed the young at the nest.	Forster's Terns are migratory, but to a lesser extent than Common Terns. They winter along the southern US coastline.	forsters_tern	FOTE			
433	32	Sterna	hirundo	Common Tern	Fairly common coastal migrant. Uncommon fall east.	LC	Some populations, especially those in northeastern North America, have declined recently due to competition and predation from large gulls. Coastal populations have become more and more concentrated into fewer colonies. Some inland populations have also experienced decline.	The Common Tern is a streamlined bird with narrow, pointed wings. The tail extends beyond the wingtips when the bird is perched. In breeding plumage, the Common Tern has a light gray mantle and belly, a white tail, a white face, and a black cap. Unlike many larger terns, the Common Tern does not have a crest. The bill is bright red with a dark tip (the dark tip is often gone by July), and the legs are red. In the non-breeding season, this tern has black legs, a black bill, and a white forehead. A bold, dark bar is visible on the wrist of first-year birds. The outer wing feathers are dark. Juveniles are brownish with orange bills and legs. As they age, they lose the brown wash and look like non-breeding-plumage adults.		1	Common Terns frequent lakes, rivers, oceans, bays, and beaches. During the summer, they use a wide range of coastal and inland aquatic breeding habitats, but most are found in lowlands, with undisturbed flat islands or beaches surrounded by shallow water. In winter, they are more restricted to warm water coastlines.	The closest Common Tern breeding colonies are in Alberta and central Montana. In Washington, this tern is a common migrant in coastal areas in saltwater and sandy-shore habitats in May through early June, and then again from August through October. It is uncommon in freshwater habitats. In eastern Washington, it is a rare spring migrant and fairly common in small numbers in fall.	The Common Tern forages in flight, flying over the water, hovering, and dropping out of the air to catch prey below the surface. They also occasionally steal food from other terns.	Small fish are the mainstay of the Common Tern's diet, along with insects, crustaceans, and other aquatic creatures.		Breeding starts at 3 to 4 years. Most nesting takes place in colonies, but some isolated pairs will breed as well. Both sexes help to make a shallow scrape in soil or sand, which they line with vegetation and other debris. Incubation of the 1 to 3 eggs lasts for about 3 weeks. After a few days, the young leave the nest, but stay nearby. Both parents help feed the young, which first fly at 3 to 4 weeks of age, but stay with the adults for another couple of months.	After breeding, Common Terns may move short distances north before beginning their southward journey. A few fall migrants may linger in the north until November. Common Terns rarely winter in North America, preferring coasts as far south as Peru and Argentina.	common_tern	COTE			
434	32	Sterna	paradisaea	Arctic Tern	Fairly common pelagic migrant. Rare breeder.	LC	Throughout most of its breeding range, no obvious population trends have been observed, as most of its range is remote and protected from the effects of many human activities. At the southern edge of its breeding range on the Atlantic Coast, steady declines have been observed. The small nesting colony found in Everett (Snohomish County) in 1977 is the southern-most nesting location recorded on the West Coast of North America. The nearest regular breeding colony is 825 miles north, in southeastern Alaska. The Everett terns nested on Jetty Island for a few years, but when the vegetation grew up on the island, the habitat became unsuitable for nesting. The colony then moved to a dirt/gravel parking lot on the mainland in the early 1980s. At this unprotected site, the colony was reduced from 10-12 pairs to 2-3 pairs. This small colony persisted in Everett, where many people struggled to move the colony to a more protected site, because the Navy had plans to develop that site. Attempts to move the colony were not successful, and there has been no known breeding of Arctic Terns in Washington since 1995, though a pair was still present in 2000.	The Arctic Tern is slightly smaller than the Common Tern with long, narrow wings and very short legs. In breeding plumage, the Arctic Tern has a light gray mantle and belly. The lower half of the face is white, and the upper sports a black cap without a crest. The tail is white, and usually projects beyond the wingtips when the bird is perched. The bill and legs are red. The adult does not show the black 'wedge' in the outer flight feathers that is present on Common Terns, and instead shows a thin, black border on the trailing edge of the primaries, visible from below. In the non-breeding season, the Arctic Tern has a receding black cap, with a white forehead extending halfway back its head, and the legs and beak are black. Juveniles have a light brown wash to their plumage, but this is mostly gone by August. At first, the young have orange feet, which then turn black. A dark bar is visible on juveniles' wrists.		1	The Arctic Tern nests on marshes, tundra lakes, and shorelines in the Arctic, and south on the East Coast to New England. From 1977 to 1995, Arctic Terns nested on gravel islands and parking lots in Everett (Snohomish County). During the non-breeding season, the Arctic Tern is highly pelagic, spending most of its time on the open ocean, far from land.	Seldom seen from land south of their breeding grounds (and now that there are probably no longer Arctic Terns breeding in Washington), the best way to see them is from offshore boat trips during migration.	The Arctic Tern forages by flying slowly upward, hovering briefly, and dropping from the air to catch prey below the water's surface. They also steal food from other birds, startling them into dropping their catch by swooping at them. Arctic Terns are seldom seen resting directly on the water, even during their long migration. They may, however, be seen perched on floating logs and other debris.	Diet varies with season and location, but is primarily fish, crustaceans, and insects.		Arctic Terns don't breed until they are 3-4 years old. Both sexes help build a nest on the ground in a colony, sometimes mixed with other species of terns. The nest is out in the open, a shallow depression, often lined with plants and debris. Incubation is by both sexes and lasts about 3 weeks. The parents vigorously defend the nest, dive-bombing intruders. One to three days after hatching, the young leave the nest and hide in nearby cover. Both parents help feed the young until they fledge, usually at 3-4 weeks of age. After that, the young stay with their parents for one or two months more.	True long-distance migrants, some Arctic Terns migrate greater distances than any other birds, traveling from the high Arctic to the Antarctic and back every year. This migration is mostly completed well offshore, but occasionally birds are seen from shore.	arctic_tern				
435	32	Sternula	antillarum	Least Tern		LC		This highly migratory New World tern frequents estuaries, coastal lagoons, river sandbars, and sandy beaches, where it attracts attention by its tiny size and buoyant flight. The adult has a black cap, white forehead, gray mantle, white underparts, yellow legs, and black on the outer primaries. The tail is short and forked. In breeding plumage, the black-tipped yellow bill is a diagnostic field mark. Identification of terns in other plumages is less straightforward: consult a good field guide.

Least Tern has three breeding populations that have been described as distinct subspecies: along the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts from New England south through the Caribbean <I>(S.a. antillarum)</I>; along rivers in the central United States <I>(S.a. athalassos)</I>; and on the Pacific Coast from San Francisco Bay to western Mexico <I>(S.a. browni)</I>. The first two populations winter from the Caribbean to Brazil, while the Pacific population winters along the coast in Mexico and Central America. The breeding populations of Least Tern in California and the interior U.S. are listed as Endangered under the federal Endangered Species Act. Least Tern nests on the ground, where it is vulnerable to predators and to human activity such as beach recreation. The California population had shrunk to 600 pairs by 1973. Protection of its nesting sites&#8212;thanks, especially, to an active management program on military installations&#8212;led to a population rebound, with 2,750 pairs recorded by 1994.

Least Terns occur very rarely in the Pacific Northwest as spring migration &#8220;overshoots,&#8221; non-breeding vagrants, or post-breeding dispersants. Oregon has about 11 records, mostly coastal, between March and mid-August. Washington&#8217;s three records are all from coastal Grays Harbor County: Ocean Shores in August 1978 and May 2005 (two birds), and Westport in May 2004. Idaho&#8217;s one accepted record is from Sandpoint in March 1988. The single record from British Columbia came at Osoyoos in June 1998.

<I>Revised June 2007</I>		1								least_tern				
436	17	Streptopelia	decaocto	Eurasian Collared-Dove		LC		A recent arrival in Washington, this exotic invader is increasing explosively and is certainly here to stay. It adapts especially well to agricultural and suburban landscapes but might be found in just about any low- or mid-elevation habitat except for closed forest and dense urban development. Native to South Asia, it has also been established for centuries in the Middle East, Turkey, and northern China, where it was likely introduced. Beginning in the 1930s, it rapidly expanded its range northward and westward from the Balkans across Europe and is now a common resident from Japan and Burma to Portugal and the Faeroes.

Several birds were released from captivity in the Bahamas in 1974, and flourished; their offspring soon reached Florida where the population mushroomed. From this beachhead Eurasian Collared-Doves swept across the continent in the 1990s. The first Oregon record occurred on 21 December 1999 at Oregon City, and the first Washington record (not yet reviewed by the Washington Bird Records Committee) was on 2 January 2000 at Spokane (Spokane County). The second state record occurred at Wenatchee (Chelan County) in 2002; the third, in 2003 at Stanwood (Snohomish County), was also the first state record west of the Cascades. The leading edge of the main wave arrived in May 2005.  Since then more than 200 birds have been reported from many locations in both eastern and western Washington, including evidence of breeding.

The Eurasian Collared-Dove is overall pale grayish with warmer light-brown tones on the back, and has on the nape a black collar narrowly edged with white. It is larger, less slender, and grayer in color than the Mourning Dove, which lacks the black collar. The blunt-tipped tail is fan-shaped when spread, unlike the Mourning Dove&#8217;s much longer, pointed tail. African Collared-Dove <I>(Streptopelia roseogrisea)</I>&#8212;an escaped cage bird occasionally seen in Washington, formerly known as Ringed Turtle-Dove <I>(S. risoria)</I>&#8212;is rather similar to the Eurasian Collared-Dove but smaller and lighter in color (can be almost white). Consult field guides for the finer points of separating these two closely related species.

<I>Revised July 2007</I>		1								eurasian_collared-dove	EUCD			
437	60	Strix	nebulosa	Great Gray Owl	Rare resident east. Irregular winter west.	LC	Much of the Great Gray Owl's range is remote and protected from human disturbance; however populations have probably declined in the southern part of their range due to loss of habitat.  The availability of nest sites may be a limiting factor, especially in areas that have been logged.  There are few places in Washington that provide the appropriate habitat for Great Gray Owls, and the state has very few nesting records.  Great Gray Owls are currently included on the Washington Gap Analysis Project's at-risk list.	Not surprisingly, Great Gray Owls are large and gray.  The plumage of Great Gray Owls is finely mottled and streaked, and the owls have distinctive black and white markings on their throats.  They have large heads without ear-tufts, large facial disks, and yellow eyes.  Their plumage is especially fluffy and thick, which makes them look larger-bodied than they really are.  Although they are taller and have longer wingspans than Great Horned Owls, they weigh on average 15% less.		1	Great Gray Owls inhabit mature conifer forests adjacent to open wet meadows.  Most breed in mountainous areas but may winter at lower elevations with thinner snow cover.  Great Gray Owls require areas with large trees and a dense covering canopy.  Dead trees are an important component of their habitat as they provide potential nest sites.  As part of learning to fly, juveniles  climb leaning trees.	Great Gray Owls breed in eastern Okanogan and western Ferry Counties and probably elsewhere in the eastern part of the state.  They can be found rarely as winter visitors in western Washington lowlands and other parts of the state.	Great Gray Owls hunt by day as well as night, especially during the summer when they are raising chicks.  They typically use a sit-and-wait hunting style, watching from a perch and swooping down silently on unsuspecting prey.  Sometimes they fly low over open areas, scanning for prey.  They can locate prey by sound alone and will break through crusted snow to get at rodents tunneling more than a foot beneath the surface.  Sometimes Great Gray Owls form loose groups in winter where there is a concentration of prey.	Small mammals, especially rodents such as voles, pocket gophers, and mice make up most of the Great Gray Owl's diet.		Monogamous, long-term pairs nest in abandoned hawk or raven nests, broken-topped trees, or on man-made nesting platforms.  They do not add any material to the nest and may reuse the same nest several years.  Clutches typically contain 2-5 eggs but may be larger when prey is abundant.  The female incubates the eggs for about 30 days, while the male brings her food.  The female broods the young for 2-3 weeks after they hatch, while the male brings food to the female and the owlets.  After 3-4 weeks, the young begin to climb about on nearby branches; they can fly 1-2 weeks later.  Sometimes the female departs once the young begin to fly; sometimes she remains and helps the male, who continues to feed the young for up to three months.	Great Gray Owls often move down-slope in winter.  This movement may be tied to prey abundance, snow depth, or a combination of both.  Some winters, Great Gray Owls wander far south of their normal range.	great_gray_owl				
438	60	Strix	occidentalis	Spotted Owl	Rare resident.	NT	The conservation of Spotted Owls and their old-growth habitat is an issue that has sparked fierce debate between environmentalists and the timber industry.  In the Pacific Northwest, more than half of former old-growth habitat has already been lost.  Most Spotted Owl habitat in Washington is unprotected, and the timber has high economic value.  Attempts were made to federally list Spotted Owls, based on their low numbers, historic and projected habitat loss, declining survival rates, and the failure of existing protective measures.  After two failed attempts, the Seattle Audubon Society sued to force federal listing.  The northern subspecies of Spotted Owl ('Northern Spotted Owl') is now listed as threatened by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and as endangered by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.  It is included on the Washington Gap Analysis Project's at-risk list.  A number of recovery and management plans have been proposed and rejected as the debate over Spotted Owls continues.  The current management plan requires enough clusters of old-growth forest to be preserved to sustain 1,500-2,000 territories and to allow for dispersal between territories.  The dispersal factor is important, as dispersal time is a particularly dangerous stage of life for the Spotted Owl, with 80% of juveniles failing to survive.  Increased habitat fragmentation allows Great Horned and Barred Owls to invade habitat that was formerly used exclusively by Spotted Owls.  Great Horned Owls prey on Spotted Owls, especially dispersing juveniles.  Barred Owls out-compete Spotted Owls for limited nesting sites, and the two species hybridize.  Recently the State Public Lands Commissioner has been taking steps to allow logging in Spotted Owl habitat in southwestern Washington to help pay for school construction.  Meanwhile, the Spotted Owl population in Washington continues to decline precipitously.  Recent surveys have found significantly fewer owls than were found in surveys performed a only decade ago.	Spotted Owls are medium-sized owls with brown eyes and no ear-tufts.  They are gray-brown in color, with light spotting on their backs and breasts.  They are slightly smaller than the closely-related and similar-appearing Barred Owl.		1	Spotted Owls are found in to low and mid-elevation mature forests with dense canopy.  They prefer forests of Douglas Fir with complex vegetation at multiple levels and are often found near streams or other water sources.  Because Spotted Owls typically do not cross brushy or clearcut areas, they prefer large expanses of undisturbed mature forest. A single pair of Spotted Owls requires 2,000-5,000 acres of contiguous forest!	Spotted Owls are uncommon residents in appropriate old-growth habitats at low to mid-elevations on both sides of the Cascades and in the Olympic Mountains.  The Naches district of the Wenatchee National Forest on the eastern slopes of the Cascades (in Chelan, Kittitas, and Yakima Counties) also holds a significant population.	Spotted Owls hunt mostly at night, but during the nesting season may also hunt during the day.  They are sit-and-wait predators, watching from perches and then swooping silently down on unsuspecting prey, grasping it with their talons.  They also take prey in mid-air and from branches.  They react to variations in temperature by moving up and down within the canopy, which may be one of the reasons they require such complex habitat structure.	Northern Flying Squirrels are their most common prey, but they also eat rats, mice, voles, rabbits, and bats.  To a lesser extent they feed on small birds, reptiles, and large invertebrates.	Records generalized to full township/ranges; true population density thus much thinner than symbolized. Once uncommon but widespread in mature coniferous forests with dense canopy cover at moderate elevations in Cascades on both sides of crest; now rare, local, declining precipitously, and may be headed for extirpation. Population crash attributed to after-effects of unsustainable forestry practices exacerbated by competition from recent arrival and phenomenal spread of Barred Owls. Second-phase atlas teams found far fewer Spotted Owls, with Barred Owls newly present in many former Spotted Owl locations.	Spotted Owls are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds.  These bonds are maintained throughout the year, and pairs defend their territories year-round.  They nest in trees with broken-tops and other natural hollows, in old stick nests of other species, in artificial nest boxes, and, especially in eastern Washington, in mistletoe tangles.  The female scrapes a depression in existing debris, but adds no additional material to the nest.  Spotted Owls reuse the same nest site for many years.  Most pairs do not nest every year.  The female typically incubates 2 eggs for 28-32 days, while the male brings her food.  Once the young hatch, the female broods for 8-10 days and the male bring food to both the female and the young.  The young leave the nest and venture onto nearby branches at 34-36 days.  At this time the female joins the male bringing food to the young, which remain with their parents for 60-90 more days.	Spotted Owls do not migrate but may wander to lower elevations in deep snow or when prey is scarce.  Young birds may disperse long distances, which sometimes brings them into inappropriate habitats.	spotted_owl	SPOW			
439	60	Strix	varia	Barred Owl	Fairly common resident.	LC	Barred Owls are widespread and common throughout most of their range.  Their range expanded dramatically to the west in the second half of the 20th Century.  They were first recorded in eastern Washington in 1965 and in western Washington in 1973.  Breeding in western Washington was first recorded in 1975. The Barred Owl's expansion into the Spotted Owl's range has created additional challenges for this already troubled species.  Barred Owls out-compete Spotted Owls, and in some instances even hybridize with them, both sources of concern.  Currently, however, there are no measures to control Washington's growing population of Barred Owls.	Barred Owls are medium-large owls with brown eyes and no ear-tufts.  They are gray-brown in color, with light mottling on their backs.  Breasts are barred horizontally and bellies vertically, with a clear demarcation between the horizontal and vertical barring.  Barred Owls are slightly larger than the closely related, similar-appearing Spotted Owls.		1	In much of the country, Barred Owls are associated with large trees in old-growth forests.  In Washington, they also use mature second-growth forests.  These forests may be coniferous, broad-leaved, or mixed, often with openings from logging.  Barred Owls are often found in swampy areas and at elevations higher than those that support Spotted Owls.  At times they inhabit city parks and low-density residential areas, especially in winter.	Barred Owls can be found year-round in most lowland and montane forests throughout Washington. They are believed to be most common in western Washington and on either side of the Cascades.	Barred Owls are most active at night but also call and hunt during the day.  They are sit-and-wait predators, sitting quietly on a perch before swooping silently down on unsuspecting prey.  Occasionally they also hunt on the wing.  Barred Owls have a wide variety of vocalizations and often call back and forth with their mates.	Barred Owls are generalists, preying on small mammals, birds, frogs, and even large invertebrates.	Fairly common, widely distributed, and rapidly increasing. Utilizes mixed and coniferous forests of various ages from sea level to fairly high elevation. Absent from steppe zone of Kittitas County. Still rather scarce during first atlas phase when most surveys in western King County conducted; although not reflected on map, has expanded into this area in ensuing years wherever appropriate forest patches available, including most large city parks. Established in southern Kitsap County since close of atlas period. Smith et al. (1997) characterized Barred Owl as uncommon, but second-phase atlas teams recorded it more frequently than any other large forest owl.	Barred Owls are monogamous and form long-term pair bonds.  These bonds are maintained throughout the year, and pairs may defend their territories year-round, though in the eastern part of the state males often leave their territories after the breeding season.  Barred Owls nest in natural tree hollows, in old hawk, squirrel and crow's nests, and in artificial nest boxes.  They add little or no material to the nest.  The female typically incubates 2-3 eggs for 28-33 days, while the male brings her food.  Once the young hatch, the female broods for about two weeks, and the male brings food to both the female and the young.  At 4-5 weeks, the young leave the nest and venture onto nearby branches.  Only then does the female also begin to feed herself and the young.  Young Barred Owls begin to take short flights at 10 weeks and longer sustained flights at 12 weeks.	Barred Owls do not migrate but may wander from their nesting territories when prey is scarce, as for example when snow is deep.  Young birds also disperse in fall.	barred_owl	BADO			
440	30	Sturnella	neglecta	Western Meadowlark	Common summer east, uncommon west. Fairly common winter, mostly west.	LC	Western Meadowlarks are abundant and widespread, but breeding populations have declined slightly throughout their range in recent years, a trend seen in Washington in both the winter and breeding seasons. Most of this decline can probably be attributed to habitat destruction from livestock grazing, mowing, and development, and contamination from pesticides. In northeastern Washington, the conversion of forested river valleys to agricultural uses may be increasing available habitat, but western Washington populations have declined significantly in recent years as the remaining prairie in this part of the state is developed, degraded by invasive plants, or altered by fire suppression. Western Meadowlarks are extremely sensitive to human disturbance during the breeding season and will abort nesting attempts if they are flushed while incubating eggs.	Western Meadowlarks look distinctively different from other members of the blackbird family in Washington. They have streaked brown upperparts and solid yellow underparts with a distinct black collar. The yellow and black are both more intense during the breeding season. They have long legs and short tails with white outer tail-feathers that are obvious in flight.		1	Meadowlarks are open-country birds. They inhabit grasslands, shrub-steppe, and agricultural areas. During winter, they can often be found in cultivated fields and wet grasslands.	During the breeding season, Western Meadowlarks can be found in open lowlands throughout the state, but are most abundant in eastern Washington. Western Washington breeders are rare to uncommon, and are locally distributed in the Puget Trough, the Vancouver lowlands, and Sequim, where they remain year round, and are joined in winter by birds from the north and east. Most leave eastern Washington locations, although some may overwinter near feedlots in the Columbia and Snake River valleys. They start to return to the shrub-steppe zone in late February, and are common by mid-April.	Western Meadowlarks flock in winter in single-species groups, or with other blackbirds and starlings. Meadowlarks forage mostly on the ground, running or walking, and probing the soil with their bills. In early spring, Western Meadowlarks sing continually from shrub tops, fence posts, utility poles, or any other high structure in their open-country habitat.	During the summer, insects make up most of the diet. In fall and winter, seeds and waste grain become more important.	Common in grasslands, shrub-steppe, and agricultural areas at low and moderate elevations in Kittitas County. Formerly more common in western Washington lowlands, but prairie habitat now greatly reduced by development and invasive plants. One probable record near Black Diamond; other King County BBA records may indicate remnant breeders, but more likely represent migrants or lingering winter residents. Not recorded from Island or Kitsap Counties, where rare even outside breeding season.	Western Meadowlarks nest on the ground, often in small dips or hollows, such as those created by cow footprints. Nests are typically under dense vegetation and can be very difficult to find. Western Meadowlarks are polygynous. Successful males generally mate with two females at a time. Females build the nests, which are grass domes with side entrances. The nest materials are often interwoven with adjacent growth, and small trails may form through the grass to the nests. Females incubate 4 to 6 eggs for 13 to 14 days. The females brood the young after they hatch and provide most of the food, although the male may help. The young leave the nest 10 to 12 days after hatching. They cannot fly at this age but can run well, and, with the help of cryptic plumage, can hide successfully in the grass. Females often raise two broods a season.	Western Meadowlarks are resident throughout much of their range, but when deep snow covers food sources they may move into sheltered valleys. Some populations appear to be long-distance migrants.	western_meadowlark	WEME			
441	61	Sturnus	vulgaris	European Starling	Common resident.	LC	It is hard to imagine now, but European Starlings were purposefully introduced into the United States from Europe.  The effort failed twice before a successful introduction of about 60 birds was made in New York City's Central Park in 1890.  Those birds reproduced and spread quickly across developed and other human-altered habitats.  European Starlings were first recorded in Washington in 1943, only 53 years later.  The first confirmed breeding was in 1951, and by then starlings had crossed into western Washington.  The first record in the Puget Sound region was in 1949, and the first western Washington breeding was in 1955.  By 1977, only 34 years after they first appeared in Washington, European Starlings were abundant throughout the state.  The Breeding Bird Survey recorded only a slight, not statistically significant, increase in Washington between 1966 and 2002. However even if the population increase is leveling off, current numbers are high enough that European Starlings are considered pests. European Starlings have had a strong negative impact on many cavity-nesting birds, Western Bluebirds, Lewis' Woodpeckers, and Purple Martins among them.  A number of control methods have been proposed, but as yet no successful, cost-effective, sustainable methods have been discovered.	The European Starling is a medium-sized, black songbird with short, triangular wings, spotted plumage, and a short tail.  The adult in breeding plumage has a distinctive thin, pointed, yellow bill and black, speckled plumage with purple-green iridescence.  The non-breeding adult has a black beak and light spots.  Juveniles are drab gray-brown overall.  Males and females look alike.		1	Starlings are typically associated with disturbed areas and human-altered settings.  They can be found in practically all habitats, with the exception of large tracts of undisturbed forests and undeveloped alpine areas.  They usually forage in open areas, especially lawns, agricultural fields, or other developed areas, but require nearby nesting cavities.	European Starlings are abundant year round in most lower-elevation habitats throughout Washington, especially in proximity to human development.	European Starlings tend to form flocks year round, but flocks are generally larger'and often huge'in fall and winter.  They often forage with other species, including Red-winged Blackbirds, Brown-headed Cowbirds, American Robins, House Sparrows, crows, and Rock Doves.  When foraging, they generally walk or run along the ground and probe the soil with their bills, looking for food.  Starlings can be aggressive and will persistently harass other species to take over nesting cavities.  They will also mob predators in flight, gathering into tight flocks and dive-bombing a hawk or other predator.  Starlings are intelligent and adaptable, and are capable mimics.	Starlings eat a diverse, omnivorous diet of invertebrates, berries and other fruit, grains, and seeds.  They commonly come to seed and suet feeders.	Introduced from Europe. Abundant throughout our area in virtually all habitats except dense, continuous forest, hence mostly absent in montane zones. Nearly all BBA records at higher elevation occurred along highway corridors. Most common in developed and agricultural areas. Aggressive nester, competing with native species for natural cavities in snags and cliffs and man-made cavities such as provided nest boxes.	Starlings are generally monogamous, but can be polygamous. They begin nesting early in the breeding season. Males establish territories and choose nest sites, then attract females.  European Starlings are cavity nesters, and nests are generally located in natural hollows, old woodpecker holes, birdhouses, or building eaves and crevices.  The male generally starts the nest, and the female finishes the job, often removing material that the male placed initially.  The nest is a loose pile of twigs, weeds, grass, feathers, leaves, and other material, with a depression in the middle.  Both members of the pair help incubate 4 to 6 eggs for about 12 days.  Females will sometimes lay eggs in other starlings' nests.  Both adults help brood the young and bring food to the nest.  The young leave the nest after about three weeks.  The parents may continue to feed the young for a day or two after they fledge, but the young can forage on their own at that time. If this is the first brood, the female typically starts laying a second brood shortly after the first one fledges.  The male may provide support for up to 12 days after the young leave the nest, and the young often join other newly fledged young on communal roosts.	European Starlings appear to be partially migratory, but patterns vary regionally and individually.  Many birds move into valleys and urban areas during the winter.	european_starling	EUST			
442	62	Sula	leucogaster	Brown Booby		LC		One bird seen at Protection Island for several days in October 1997.		1								brown_booby				
443	62	Sula	nebouxii	Blue-footed Booby		LC		One bird collected in Puget Sound off Everett (Snohomish County) in September 1935.		1								blue-footed_booby				
444	60	Surnia	ulula	Northern Hawk Owl		LC		Casual winter visitor, mostly east of Cascades. One recent breeding-season record, from Chelan County. Has nested not far from Washington in British Columbia and Idaho panhandle.		1								northern_hawk_owl				
445	5	Synthliboramphus	antiquus	Ancient Murrelet	Uncommon fall and winter coast. May breed.	LC	Although still abundant, the world population of Ancient Murrelets has been declining for many years. They are very sensitive to disturbance during incubation, and introduced predators on nesting islands have had major impacts on a number of colonies. Oil contamination and loss of habitat are also potential threats to Ancient Murrelets.	A small, stocky bird, the Ancient Murrelet is slate-gray above, with gray and white sides and a white belly. The head is black, and the bill is pale. White on the throat extends back and up to the ears. During the breeding season, the throat is black, with a white band at the neck. The eyebrow is accented with white feathers at this time.		1	Ancient Murrelets spend most of the time on cold-water seas. They forage over the edge of the continental shelf, and also closer to shore, especially in areas where tidal currents bring food up to the surface. They nest on islands or inland in dense forests with thick moss but little underbrush.	More pelagic and gregarious than Marbled Murrelets, Ancient Murrelets are typically found farther out, with flocks of up to 30 birds a common sight in the winter. From October through December, they are numerous in offshore areas, are often visible from shore, and are the most likely of Washington's alcids to be found inland (especially in October and November). They are uncommon from January to March, and from mid-August through September. They are rare from April to mid-August, with non-breeders occasionally spotted on open salt water. Washington is at the southern edge of the Ancient Murrelet breeding range, and it is uncertain whether they currently nest here at all. The last confirmed breeding record in Washington is from 1924. Breeding-season sightings are so rare that it is most likely non-breeders that we see here. However, there is some evidence to suggest that there may be a small breeding population on one of the outer-coast islands in Clallam or Jefferson Counties.	The Ancient Murrelet is more agile in flight than most alcids and will often plunge directly from the air into the water to forage. Swimming underwater, using its wings as flippers, it catches most of its food within sixty feet of the surface. Its breeding behavior is unusual among seabirds in that, at night, in the nesting colonies, males sing from tree branches and other high perches.	Small fish, krill, and shrimp make up most of the Ancient Murrelet's diet.		Ancient Murrelets nest in small colonies located on islands or in coastal forests. They place their nests at the bases of large trees in burrows under the roots, or under grass tussocks. Both sexes dig the burrows, which are 2-5 feet long and end in a nest chamber lined with twigs, leaves, and grass. Like many alcids, they are active in the colonies at night. They raise two young, and both parents incubate the eggs, often taking extended shifts on the nest, lasting from 2-6 days at a time. Incubation lasts for about 4 weeks. Within three days of hatching, the parents call the young out from the burrow and then fly to sea, where they repeatedly call for the young. The newly hatched chicks run to shore from the burrows, enter the water, and swim to the parents. Immediately upon reaching the water they can swim and dive well, using both their feet and wings for propulsion. Chicks do not receive their first meal until they have joined their parents on the water. The family swims offshore together, and groups have been found 30 miles from the colony within 18 hours of departure. Chicks will stay with and be fed by their parents at sea for at least four more weeks.	Some seasonal movement occurs. After the young hatch, Ancient Murrelets disperse widely at sea. In winter, they prefer coastal areas, often foraging within the kelp belt.	ancient_murrelet				
446	5	Synthliboramphus	hypoleucus	Xantus's Murrelet		EN		Rare but about annual on Westport pelagic trips (Grays Harbor County).		1								xantuss_murrelet				
447	28	Tachycineta	bicolor	Tree Swallow	Common summer resident.	LC	According to Breeding Bird Survey data, Tree Swallows have increased (although not significantly) in Washington between 1980 and 2002. While the popularity of bluebird houses has provided many nest boxes for Tree Swallows, competition with European Starlings and House Sparrows for these and other cavities keeps the population in check. Relatively high levels of pesticides have been found in some western populations, and Tree Swallows are often used as indicator species for pollutants.	Tree Swallows are elegant birds with white undersides, iridescent blue-green backs, and moderately forked tails. Seen in profile, this swallow has a sharp line of demarcation between the dark of the head above the eye and the pure white of the rest of the face and underparts. In Washington, Tree Swallows are most likely to be confused with Violet-green Swallows, but Violet-green Swallows have white patches extending up the sides of the rump that can be seen in flight. The white on the faces of Violet-green Swallows extends above their eyes. Male and female Tree Swallows in adult plumage look similar to each other, but Tree Swallows are unique in that first-year females, although reproductively mature, have a different plumage from older birds. This plumage is similar to the juvenile plumage--non-iridescent brownish-gray above with a grayish-white belly. Juveniles have a grayish breast-band that first-year females lack. Juveniles could be mistaken for Bank Swallows, but the breast-band of Bank Swallows is more distinct than that of juvenile Tree Swallows.		1	When nesting, Tree Swallows are usually found near water.  They require nest cavities, either natural or man-made. Often these cavities are situated over or immediately adjacent to water.	Tree Swallows are common in many open areas and wetlands throughout Washington from March through mid-August.	This social bird is often found in flocks. Tree Swallows are highly acrobatic and forage mostly in flight, often swooping low over open water or fields, sometimes skimming food items from the water's surface.	Flying insects make up most of the Tree Swallow's diet, although more than any other Washington swallow, the Tree Swallow eats berries and other vegetative matter when insects aren't flying. This allows the Tree Swallow to weather cold spells better than other swallows, which in turn allows it to winter farther north.	Early breeder, common in open habitats near water at lower elevations, less so in mountains along rivers and lakes with snags, on both sides of Cascade crest. Breeds in tree cavities or nest boxes near or over water, but also utilizes bluebird boxes away from water in Kittitas County. Apparently does not breed along Columbia River, no doubt due to absence of suitable cavities for nesting. Single record from West Bar, from early May, likely represents migrant.	Tree Swallows are mainly monogamous, but extra-pair copulations are common. They nest in cavities--natural tree cavities, old woodpecker holes, or man-made nest boxes. Nests are located singly or in loose colonies. The male brings nesting material to the female, and she does most of the construction. The nest is a cup of grass, weeds, and other plant material, lined with feathers. The female incubates four to seven eggs for 14 to 15 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 18 to 22 days. Parents continue to feed the young for at least three days after they leave the nest.	Tree Swallows are migrants, but do not migrate as far as other swallow species since they are not entirely dependent on flying insect prey. They migrate in loose flocks by day and gather in large groups to roost at night. They arrive in March, quite early in the spring. Most leave by mid-August, although a few can usually be found through September.  Tree Swallows winter from North Carolina, the Gulf Coast, and Southern California to Cuba and Guatemala.	tree_swallow	TRES			
448	28	Tachycineta	thalassina	Violet-green Swallow	Common summer resident.	LC	Violet-green Swallows have increased significantly in Washington since 1966. They may have benefited from an increased supply of artificial nest boxes, although they must compete with European Starlings and House Sparrows for them. Their ability to use a variety of habitats and the fact that they can nest successfully in cities and towns should help the population remain stable.	Violet-green Swallows are small and sleek, iridescent violet-green above and white below.  The sides of their heads are white, with the white extending above the eye. Their tails are moderately forked.  The white of the undersides extends up the sides of the rump forming two white patches.  In Washington, Violet-green Swallows are most likely to be confused with Tree Swallows, but Tree Swallows have no white above the eye and no white patches. On perched birds, the wings of Violet-green Swallows extend beyond the tail while those of Tree Swallows do not.  Compared to males, females are drab in color.  Juveniles are brownish-gray above with a grayish-white belly. They have dusky faces and lack the faint breast-band of the juvenile Tree Swallow.		1	This western species is often associated with coniferous forests in mountainous areas, but in Washington it uses a variety of habitats. Young forests, clearcuts, prairies, wetlands, open water, and even cities are all used by Violet-green Swallows. This is the swallow most likely to be seen in urban areas within Washington's forested zones. Violet-green Swallows are often found at forest edges with large snags or other cavities for nesting. In late summer they are common at high elevations. During migration, they are often found near water, and in early spring, many remain near water and do not disperse to their breeding areas until the arrival of consistently warm weather.	Violet-green Swallows are common throughout Washington in appropriate habitats from mid-March to early September. In some places, including Yakima County, they return as early as late February. They are less common, but can still be seen, through the end of September. During fall migration, thousands collect in south-central Washington (Klickitat County).	These social birds are often found in flocks of mixed-swallow species and in single-species flocks. They are highly acrobatic and forage almost exclusively in flight. Their flight is more fluttery than that of Tree Swallows, and they often fly higher than other swallow species.  They will, however, feed low over open water, especially in bad weather.	Violet-green Swallows feed almost exclusively on flying insects.	Common and densely distributed at lower elevations throughout Puget Trough counties in rural, suburban, and urban landscapes, where nests in tree cavities, provided nest boxes, and buildings. Also locally common in low- and mid-elevation riparian and residential areas in Kittitas County. Common breeder in Yakima Canyon and along Columbia River, utilizing basalt cliffs for nesting. Penetrates Cascades along river valleys but uncommon and local in intact mid- and high-elevation forests, <i>contra</i> predicted range mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). Phenomenal success in developed lowlands perhaps attributable to adaptation to human-built structures for nesting.	Violet-green Swallows nest in tree cavities, cliffs, buildings, old woodpecker holes, and nest boxes. Originally, they probably nested in rock crevices and tree holes, and although they now take advantage of man-made structures, they do not take as readily to nest boxes as do Tree Swallows. They nest in isolated pairs or small colonies of up to 25 nests. Both male and female build the nest, a cup of grass, twigs, rootlets, and straw, lined with feathers of other birds. The female incubates four to six eggs for 14 to 15 days. Both adults feed the young, which leave the nest after 23-24 days. The parents continue to feed the young for some time after they leave the nest.	Violet-green Swallows arrive early in spring, especially in eastern Washington, and are one of the first returning migrants. After a post-breeding migration to higher elevations, they leave for the winter. Some winter on the southern California coast, but most winter in Mexico and Central America. Two waves of migrants can often be detected, birds that have bred in Washington leaving the state in late July or early August and breeders from farther north (including many immature birds) passing through in late September. They migrate in flocks, often traveling along ridges and major rivers.	violet-green_swallow	VGSW			
449	20	Thalassarche	cauta	Shy Albatross		NT		The Shy Albatross nests on islands in southern oceans and has been recorded only a handful of times north of the equator. It is about the same size as Short-tailed Albatross and somewhat larger than Laysan, and like them is basically black-and-white. The adult has white underparts, white underwings narrowly edged with black, grayish back, white rump, dark tail, and white to grayish head. The upperwing appears all-dark except for a white flash at the base of the primaries. The black notch on the underwing at the point where the leading edge of the wing joins the body is diagnostic. Bill color is also a useful field mark: gray (with yellow tip in adults) in Shy, yellow in Laysan, and pink in Short-tailed. See specialized field guides for other distinctions, including separation of the geographical races of Shy Albatross.

Albatross taxonomy is in a near-constant state of flux. The Shy Albatross, as currently recognized by the American Ornithologists&#8217; Union, includes four subspecies, each of which has sometimes been accorded full species status by various other authorities. Two of these subspecies have been recorded in Washington waters; a third has occurred elsewhere in the northeastern Pacific and might easily turn up off the Washington coast some day. Nominate Shy Albatross <I>(T.c. cauta)</I> nests on islands off Tasmania. The closely similar <I>T.c. steadi</I> nests in the Auckland Islands about 300 miles south of the South Island of New Zealand; the common name White-capped Albatross has been suggested for this form if it is recognized as a full species. The first record of Shy Albatross in the northern hemisphere was a bird collected in Washington 39 miles off the mouth of the Quillayute River (Clallam County) on 1 September 1951, subsequently identified as <I>T.c. steadi.</I> The second of Washington&#8217;s two records was an individual of the <I>T.c. cauta</I> subspecies closely studied and photographed on a pelagic boat trip from Westport (Grays Harbor County) on 22 January 2000. A very similar bird found a few months earlier on a pelagic boat trip off Point Arena, California, on 24 August 1999, and also identified as <I>T.c. cauta,</I> may have been the same individual. Two records of Shy Albatross from Heceta Bank, Oregon (5 October 1996 and 7 October 2001) could be either <I>T.c. cauta</I> or <I>T.c.steadi.</I>

The third subspecies, <I>T.c. salvini</I> (Salvin&#8217;s Albatross), breeds on three small subantarctic island groups&#8212;the Bounty Islands and the Snares southeast and south of the South Island of New Zealand, and the Crozet Islands about 1,400 miles south of Madagascar&#8212;and has been recorded five times since 2000 in California, Hawaii, and Alaska. The fourth subspecies is <I>T.c. eremita,</I> or Chatham Albatross, which nests on Chatham Island, New Zealand. It is markedly different from the other three (slightly smaller, gray-hooded, uniform yellow bill) and is not known to venture beyond the central South Pacific Ocean.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								shy_albatross				
450	32	Thalasseus	elegans	Elegant Tern	Irregular visitor on outer coast.	NT	The Elegant Tern has the most restricted breeding distribution of any tern in North America, and only five colonies are currently known. The largest of the five, located on Isla Rasa, Mexico hosts 90-97% of the worldwide population. Historically, this is a species of limited distribution, with only about a dozen nesting colonies, but disturbance from humans and feral animals, habitat degradation, and changing climatic conditions have reduced it even further, to the current small number of colonies. The breeding range is currently expanding northward into California, however, perhaps in response to the shifting distribution of northern anchovies. The Elegant Tern is a highly vulnerable species and is listed as a species of special concern in California. Some conservationists believe that the US and Mexico should immediately list the Elegant Tern as endangered and begin recovery programs before it is too late.	The Elegant Tern is a fairly large, slim tern, with a long, orange, slightly drooping bill. It has narrow, angled wings, a deeply forked tail, and a shaggy crest. The adult in breeding plumage has a gray mantle, white breast and belly, and white face with a black, crested cap. The legs are black. The adult in non-breeding plumage is similar, but with a white forehead that darkens to streaky black, as if the cap has receded. Juveniles appear similar to non-breeding adults, but their legs are yellow.		1	A coastal species, the Elegant Tern is found in shallow waters, in bays and estuaries, and sometimes far out to sea. It is extremely rare inland. Nesting habitat is isolated, flat, sandy or rocky islands without much vegetation, and is restricted to five sites in Mexico and southern California.	The Elegant Tern is a rare visitor to Washington from July to mid-September, along the southern outer coast in sandy habitats and offshore. In some years, Elegant Terns can be found in fairly good numbers in southwestern Washington locations, e.g. Ocean Shores (Grays Harbor County) and in Pacific County. They may be absent in other years.	Elegant Terns are highly social and very vocal, especially when feeding in flocks.  They forage by flying over water, hovering, and plunging down to catch prey below the water's surface.	The key prey of this species on its breeding grounds is the northern anchovy. Other small fish and small crustaceans round out the diet.		Elegant Terns sometimes breed in mixed colonies with other terns or Heerman's Gulls, where their nests are packed closely together. They nest on bare ground, out in the open. Both parents help to make a simple scrape in the ground, collecting debris to form a rim and sometimes lining the scrape with pebbles or shells.  The female lays one or perhaps two eggs. Incubation is by both sexes, and lasts about 4 weeks. After hatching, the chick stays in the nest for about a week. Then, like other crested terns, it joins a group of up to several hundred chicks called a crèche. The adults take turns guarding the crèche, standing at the perimeter of the group and herding the chicks together. A parent feeds only its own chick in the crèche, recognizing the chick by its call note. Chicks stay in the crèche until they fledge at about 35 days, after which they follow their parents for at least five or six more months.	Elegant Terns migrate north and south along the coast in late summer and early fall after the breeding season. Birds that dispersed northward head south again in October. Their winter range extends as far south as Peru and Chile.	elegant_tern				
451	63	Thraupis	episcotus	Blue-gray Tanager		LC				0								blue-gray_tanager				
452	66	Thryomanes	bewickii	Bewick's Wren	Common resident west. Fairly common east.	LC	Bewick's Wren populations are at risk in many parts of the United States, and populations in the eastern part of their range are considered scarce and declining.  Much of the population east of the Mississippi is endangered. Most of this decline is blamed on the expansion of House Wrens, who out-compete Bewick's Wrens for nesting sites.  Throughout the western part of their range, including western Washington, Bewick's Wrens are widespread and common.  Their population has probably increased since the arrival of European settlers due to the resulting forest fragmentation and increased edge habitat.  In eastern Washington, they have been expanding their range eastward and northward since 1953.	Bewick's Wrens are slender with long-tails, gray bellies, and brown backs.  Their plumage is less mottled than that of many other wrens.  Their tails are barred with a small amount of white at the outer tips.  The most distinctive field mark of the Bewick's wren is its bold white eye-line, extending from just over the eye back to the neck.		1	Shrubby areas along clearcuts, rivers, wetlands, and parks, especially in residential and agricultural areas, are the favored habitat of the Bewick's Wren.  A mixture of shrub vegetation and open woodland is ideal for this species.	Bewick's Wrens are common year round at lower elevations throughout western Washington.  In southeastern Washington, they are found along major rivers. They can also be found around Spokane.  Their population is increasing in eastern Washington, but is still fairly scattered.	An active forager, the Bewick's Wren often climbs about on branches and trunks, probing into crevices to find food.  It also feeds on the ground, turning leaves with its bill.  Paired birds often forage together in the breeding season.  They are usually solitary the rest of the year, although some may remain paired throughout the year.	Bewick's Wrens eat mainly insects and spiders.	Common at low elevations in Kitsap, Island, and King Counties in shrubby habitats, especially residential and agricultural areas. Also occurs in clearcuts and along rivers and wetlands. Rapidly colonizing eastern Washington. Although not confirmed from Kittitas County during atlas period, has extended range up Yakima River to at least Umtanum Creek in recent years. Stepniewski (1999) describes Bewick's Wren as uncommon to rare resident in Yakima County just south of Kittitas County.	The male Bewick's Wren sings to defend his nesting territory and to attract a mate.  He starts one or more nests in various cavities, usually natural crevices, old woodpecker holes, nest boxes, or other artificial structures.  The female will select one nest and add a soft cup of moss, leaves, hair, feathers, and sometimes snakeskin to the foundation of twigs and bark built by the male.  The female incubates the 5 to 6 eggs for 14 to 16 days.  The male feeds the female while she is on the eggs, and both parents feed the young.  The young leave the nest after about two weeks, but stay together and are fed by the parents for another couple of weeks.  The monogamous pair usually stays together through the first brood, and will often raise a second brood, although sometimes they will find new mates for the second brood.	Most Bewick's Wrens in Washington are permanent residents.  Some birds from west of the Cascades move east into southeastern Washington, eastern Oregon, and western Idaho in the fall, perhaps in a post-breeding dispersal.	bewicks_wren	BEWR			
453	33	Toxostoma	rufum	Brown Thrasher		LC		Accidental spring and fall migrant on both sides of Cascades, one winter record from Spokane County.		1								brown_thrasher				
454	57	Tringa	brevipes	Gray-tailed Tattler		NT		One record, in October at Leadbetter Point (Pacific County).		1								gray-tailed_tattler				
455	57	Tringa	flavipes	Lesser Yellowlegs	Common migrant. Rare winter west.	LC	Lesser Yellowlegs were hunted heavily until the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 banned their hunting.  Observers have speculated that the population has recovered since the act took effect, but a lack of information on historical and current population size makes this claim hard to substantiate.  Breeding Bird Survey data indicate that there have been significant decreases in numbers between 1980 and 1996, although these numbers come from a small sample size and may not represent the entire population.  The International Shorebird Survey (1972-1983) suggests that there has been no significant trend in number of fall migrants at 43 stopover sites along the Atlantic.  Christmas Bird Counts indicate that the wintering population in the United States is on the increase.  The consensus today is that the population is currently stable, and the Canadian government estimates it at half a million birds.	A mottled gray shorebird with bright yellow legs, the Lesser Yellowlegs is similar in appearance to the Greater Yellowlegs, with some important differences.  The Lesser Yellowlegs is about half the size (in weight) of the Greater Yellowlegs, which is a useful distinction when the two are seen together. The bill of the Lesser Yellowlegs is not significantly longer than the diameter of its head, whereas the Greater Yellowlegs' bill is much longer. The bill of the Lesser Yellowlegs does not become paler at the base during the winter; it is solid black year round. Its bill always appears straight, without the slight upturn sometimes seen on the bill of the Greater Yellowlegs.  In flight, the Lesser has a dark back, a white rump, and a dark tip on its tail.  Relative to its size, the Lesser&#8217;s legs are longer than those of the Greater Yellowlegs, a difference that can be seen in flight (entire toes and tip of tarsus visible behind the tail).  Juvenile Lesser Yellowlegs have finer streaking on their breasts than do juvenile Greater Yellowlegs.		1	Lesser Yellowlegs breed in open boreal woods in the far north.  They often use large clearings or burned areas near ponds, and will nest as far north as the southern tundra.  During migration and winter, they occur on coasts, in marshes, on mudflats, and lakeshores.  In comparison to Greater Yellowlegs, Lessers are typically found in more protected areas, on smaller ponds. They are less common on extensive mudflats than Greater Yellowlegs.  When nesting, they generally use drier, more sheltered sites than their larger counterparts.	This species migrates through Washington on both its northward and southward trips, but is most common from mid-July through September.  Most of the birds in Washington in July are adults, and the juveniles follow from late July into early October.  Lesser Yellowlegs are fairly uncommon after the middle of October.  They can be found along the coast and in a variety of wetland habitats throughout Washington's lowlands.  In spring, they are uncommon migrants in eastern Washington from mid-April to mid-May, where they are found in freshwater wetlands.	Lesser Yellowlegs typically occur in tighter and larger flocks than do Greaters, both in flight and while feeding.  Like the Greater Yellowlegs, Lessers forage in shallow water outside the breeding season, picking at prey on or just below the water's surface.  They are less likely than Greaters to run after their prey, but more likely to scythe their bills back and forth in the water stirring up prey like an avocet.  They are typically more approachable than the wary Greater Yellowlegs.  They bob the front half of their bodies up and down, a characteristic behavior of this genus. The most common vocalization heard is a two-note flight call.	During the breeding season, insects make up the majority of the diet. The rest of the year, Lesser Yellowlegs also eat small fish and crustaceans.		Lesser Yellowlegs nest in loose colonies. They first breed at one to two years of age. They form monogamous pair bonds, but typically pair with a different mate each year.  The nest is located on the ground in a dry spot, usually near water, but sometimes quite far away.  The nest is usually well hidden in a densely vegetated area, next to a mossy hummock, fallen branch, or log. It is usually a shallow depression lined with moss, twigs, leaves, grass, and needles.  Both parents share incubation duties, and the 4 eggs hatch in 22-23 days.  The young leave the nest soon after hatching and feed themselves. Both parents tend and aggressively defend the young. The female usually leaves about 11 days after the young hatch, while the male stays with the chicks until they can fly, about 23-31 days. Pairs raise only one brood per season.	Lesser Yellowlegs are long-distance migrants and follow the classic shorebird migration pattern of traveling north concentrated in the interior of North America, and traveling south spread across the continent.  They return to the same general breeding area in successive years and migrate to the southernmost coasts of the US south to South America. The Lesser Yellowlegs is one of the earliest fall migrants, showing up by June.	lesser_yellowlegs				
456	57	Tringa	incana	Wandering Tattler	Fairly common coastal migrant.	LC	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population of Wandering Tattlers to number 10,000 birds, with half of that number breeding in Canada. They are widely dispersed across their breeding and wintering range. This distribution makes the population difficult to survey, but probably also helps their numbers to remain stable.	The Wandering Tattler is the only shorebird in this region that is plain gray above and heavily barred below.  Its bill is of medium length for a shorebird, and it has short, yellow legs. Wandering Tattlers seen in Washington are typically in breeding plumage. Juveniles and adults in non-breeding plumage look similar to adults, but lack the barring below.  In flight, the Wandering Tattler appears entirely gray above, with a solid gray tail and gray wings.		1	Wandering Tattlers nest in the far north by rocky mountain streams. During migration and winter, they inhabit rocky coasts, reefs, jetties, and breakwaters.	Wandering Tattlers are common migrants on the coast of Washington. They are rare in Puget Sound and other parts of Washington.  In the spring, they are common from mid-April to mid-May. They are usually gone from the Washington coast by the second week of May.  The post-breeding migration is more protracted, with adults common on Washington's rocky outer coast from mid-July into August. By the second week of August, most of the Wandering Tattlers coming through are juveniles, and are common into October.	Wandering Tattlers are basically solitary birds, on the ground and especially in flight. They bob and teeter while feeding, and move nervously and quickly over rocks, probing for active prey on the surface.  On the breeding grounds, they walk or wade along streams to find food. The Wandering Tattler gets part of its name from its practice of giving alarm calls when perceived threats are nearby, alerting other shorebirds to the danger. Its call is a series of clear, hollow whistles, all on one pitch.	Wandering Tattlers eat insects, crustaceans, worms, and small animals that scramble among the rocks.		The nest of the Wandering Tattler is located on the ground in a hollow in rocks or gravel, usually near a stream.  It is a shallow depression that may or may not be lined with small twigs, rootlets, or leaves. Both parents help incubate the 4 eggs for 23-25 days. Once hatched, the young leave the nest within a day and can feed themselves immediately. Both parents tend the young, although within a week or two, one parent leaves. The remaining parent tends the young until they are independent.	Long-distance migrants, Wandering Tattlers travel from Alaska and northwest Canada to the southern California coast and beyond, with some birds crossing the Pacific Ocean to spend the winter in Australia and on islands in the South Pacific.	wandering_tattler				
457	57	Tringa	melanoleuca	Greater Yellowlegs	Common migrant. Winter uncommon west, rare east.	LC	Hunting led to population declines in the 19th Century, but protection in the form of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 has helped the population recover.  Christmas Bird Count data suggest that Greater Yellowlegs are becoming more common in Washington in winter.  The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population to number 100,000 birds in North America.  Throughout their range, Greater Yellowlegs are common and widespread, but their low density, remote breeding grounds, and lack of major stopover or wintering areas make the population difficult to survey. Fortunately, these traits also protect the population from many threats, and their flexibility in migration and wintering habitat will help the population in the face of increased wetland habitat destruction. Protection of this habitat remains important to maintain numbers of this and other shorebird species.	The Greater Yellowlegs is a mottled gray wading bird with long, bright yellow legs. It is similar in appearance to its smaller relative, the Lesser Yellowlegs.  The bill of the Greater Yellowlegs is slender and longer than the diameter of its head, in contrast to the bill of the Lesser Yellowlegs, which is not significantly longer than its head.  In breeding plumage, the bill is solid black, whereas in non-breeding plumage it may be lighter gray at the base. The bill may appear slightly upturned.  The Greater Yellowlegs' cryptic plumage is mottled brownish-gray and white, with the breeding plumage brighter and more heavily barred.  An important field mark of the bird in flight is its white tail, which is barred at the end.  Relative to its size, the legs of the Greater Yellowlegs are shorter than those of the Lesser, with the result that the toes do not project as far behind the tail in flight.		1	Greater Yellowlegs breed in muskeg bogs in the northern boreal forest. Their wintering and migration habitats are more general; they can be found in many fresh and saltwater wetland habitats, including open marshes, mudflats, estuaries, open beaches, lakeshores, and riverbanks.  In comparison to Lesser Yellowlegs, Greaters are typically found in more open areas, on larger bodies of water, and on more extensive mudflats.	Greater Yellowlegs are common migrants throughout Washington's lowland wetlands.  Greatest densities are seen from mid-March through mid-May, and again from late June through October.  Some birds remain in Washington through winter, along the coast or in the Puget Trough, and occasionally east of the Cascades along the Columbia River.	Greater Yellowlegs are less social than many shorebirds, and small flocks form during migration.  Outside of the breeding season, most foraging takes place in shallow water.  They often feed actively, running after fish or other fast-moving aquatic prey.  Greater Yellowlegs swing their heads back and forth with the tips of their bills in the water, stirring up prey, but are less likely to use this foraging technique than are Lesser Yellowlegs.  The Greater Yellowlegs bobs the front half of its body up and down, a characteristic behavior of this genus.  Greater Yellowlegs are wary, often the first species to sound an alarm when a perceived threat approaches. Greater Yellowlegs are known for their piercing alarm calls that alert all the birds in the area. Their flight call consists of a series of 3 or 4 notes.	During the breeding season, insects and insect larvae are the primary sources of food. During winter and migration, small fish, crustaceans, snails, and other aquatic animals round out the diet.		Due to its low densities and remote nesting areas, the breeding biology of the Greater Yellowlegs is not well studied, and much is unknown about it.  They are presumed to be monogamous, and pairs form shortly after they arrive on the breeding grounds.  The nest is on the ground, close to the water. It is well concealed in a shallow depression, under a low shrub or next to a moss hummock.  The nest is sparsely lined with grass, leaves, lichen, and twigs.  Both parents probably help incubate the 4 eggs for 23 days. The young leave the nest soon after hatching and find their own food. The parents appear to tend the young at least until they are capable of fluttering flight, at 25 days, and may stay until they are strong flyers, at 35-40 days. Pairs raise a single brood a season.	A long-distance migrant, Greater Yellowlegs begin moving south from the breeding grounds in late June. During migration, they are found in appropriate habitat from coast to coast. While some stay in Washington through winter, most continue on to the southern US and Central and South America.  In spring, they leave South America by March and start heading back to the breeding grounds.	greater_yellowlegs	GRYE			
458	57	Tringa	semipalmata	Willet	Uncommon and local winter on coast. Rare migrant east.	LC	Washington is at the edge of the Willet's range, and the bird is not abundant in this state. Range-wide, the Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population at 250,000 birds in North America. Eastern populations were heavily hunted in the late 19th Century, but have made a good comeback with protection.	The Willet is a large, chunky shorebird with drab plumage. It is similar in height to a Greater Yellowlegs, but heavier and with a shorter neck. Its bill is long and fairly thick for a shorebird, and its legs are gray. It is mottled gray all over, with heavier barring in breeding plumage than in winter. The rump is white, and most of the tail is barred gray. The wing-linings are dark, resulting in a bold black-and-white wing pattern.		1	Willets in the eastern United States breed in coastal salt marshes, but the Midwestern population breeds in lakes and ponds, shallow marshes, wet meadows, and native grasslands. During migration and in winter, Willets are found near the ocean shore, in salt marshes, mudflats, sandy beaches, rocky areas, or wet meadows.	Small numbers of Willets winter every year in Willapa Bay (Pacific County) and on the mudflats at Tokeland, and may feed near the Raymond airport. Willets have not been known to breed in Washington, although they do breed in southern Oregon and Idaho. During migration they are rare along the coast (from mid-April to late May and from early July to mid-October) and in eastern Washington (from mid-April to late May and from mid-August to late September).	In Washington, Willets are generally found alone or in small groups. Populations farther south often feed in large flocks. The Willet forages by walking on the shore, in a marsh or in open water. It will pick food from the water, but spends more time probing the mud with its bill in search of food. Willets are strongly territorial throughout the year, and in the breeding season will vigorously defend their nesting territories and their young.	Inland Willets eat many aquatic insects and other invertebrates. In coastal areas, crabs, mollusks, and small fish are also part of the diet.		Willets often nest in colonies, especially along the Atlantic Coast. The nest is usually near water, but can be several hundred yards away. The nest is located on the ground, usually in dense grass. The grass is bent over to form the nest foundation, and then lined with finer grass. Both parents help incubate the 4 eggs for 22 to 29 days. The young leave the nest within a day of hatching and find their own food. Both parents defend and tend the young, but the female leaves after 2 to 3 weeks. The male remains with the young until they are independent at about 4 weeks.	Willets are strongly migratory. Wintering grounds include the West Coast of the United States to the north coast of South America and the West Indies. The birds wintering in Washington breed in the northern Great Plains, usually beginning by late April. Many adults depart the breeding grounds in June and July, with juveniles following soon after.	willet				
459	57	Tringa	solitaria	Solitary Sandpiper	Uncommon migrant.	LC	Solitary Sandpipers are dispersed at all seasons, and thus difficult to count.  Most of their breeding habitat remains intact, although logging in boreal forests is an increasing threat.  The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the population to number 25,000 birds in North America.	The Solitary Sandpiper is shaped like the Greater and Lesser Yellowlegs, but is smaller than both and has shorter, greenish legs. The bill is straight, thin, and of medium length. The dark back is covered in light spots, and the head is streaked gray. The head is dark enough that the white eye-ring is fairly distinct.  The tail pattern, seen in flight, is distinctive. The outer edges are white, barred with black, with a dark center.  The wings are entirely dark underneath, sharply contrasting with the white belly.		1	During the breeding season, Solitary Sandpipers inhabit muskeg bogs surrounded by spruce.  During migration, they are usually found along the banks of wooded streams, in narrow marsh channels, and sometimes along the edges of open mudflats. They can also be found in places not usually frequented by shorebirds, such as drainage ditches and mud puddles. This is predominantly a freshwater species and generally avoids tidal flats and salt marshes. Solitary Sandpipers winter in swamps and along river-banks.	Breeding Solitary Sandpipers are found regularly in southern British Columbia, and there are a few confirmed breeding records in Oregon. There are no known breeding records in Washington, but it is possible that they have nested here.  Solitary Sandpipers are uncommon migrants in Washington on both sides of the Cascades, though they are more common in eastern Washington.  They are rare along the coast from mid-April through May and July through October, with the most numbers in late April and late August.  In eastern Washington, their occurrence is similar to that on the coast, with some arriving earlier in April, and the bulge in numbers starting in the beginning of August.  Adults typically migrate through first, with juveniles coming later in the summer and into the fall. Eastern Washington has fewer adults than does coastal Washington in the spring, but more juveniles in the fall. In western Washington, the most reliable locales seem to be small, wet areas in Skagit, Snohomish, and Thurston Counties. In Seattle, Solitary Sandpipers can sometimes be seen at the Union Bay Natural Area (King County).  The ponds in Reardan (Lincoln County), west of Spokane, are also good spots to look for migrating Solitary Sandpipers.	Solitary Sandpipers do not gather in flocks. They are extremely alert and one of the first species to give alarm calls in response to a perceived threat.  These sandpipers usually forage in shallow water, picking up food items from the surface or probing into the water and mud.  They may also use their feet to stir up small creatures from the bottom.  Solitary Sandpipers bob the front half of their bodies up and down, a characteristic behavior of this genus.  When alarmed, they often fly straight up in the air to escape, a flight pattern that is perhaps an adaptation to the closed wooded areas they inhabit.  The Solitary Sandpiper's call sounds like high-pitched whistles.	Aquatic and terrestrial invertebrates are the most common food of the Solitary Sandpiper. These include insects and insect larvae, spiders, worms, and tadpoles.		The nesting biology of this species is not well known. Unlike most shorebirds, Solitary Sandpipers do not nest on the ground, but find an old, abandoned, songbird nest in a tree. (The nest is usually one that was built by an American Robin, Rusty Blackbird, Eastern Kingbird, Gray Jay or one of the waxwings--all of which build sturdy nests that are likely to survive a winter.) The male finds the nest, which the female reworks until it is suitable to her needs. She does not add any nest material, but may rearrange the lining.  This nest is usually in a spruce or other conifer and may be 4'40 feet up.  Both parents help incubate the 4 eggs for 23-24 days. The nestling state is not well known, but the parents are not known to feed the young, so they probably jump from the nest at an early age and start to find their own food. Fledging age is not known. A pair raises a single brood each season.	Long-distance migrants, Solitary Sandpipers breed in far northern areas of Canada and Alaska and winter in Central and South America.	solitary_sandpiper	SOSA			
460	66	Troglodytes	aedon	House Wren	Common summer east. Fairly common west.	LC	House Wrens currently occupy the broadest latitudinal range of any native songbird in the New World.  House Wrens have benefited from the fragmentation of forests across the United States, including Washington.  This fragmentation increases the shrubby edge habitat that they prefer.  They are fairly tolerant of human activity, which makes them well adapted to our increasingly developed landscape.  They also seem to benefit from logging, using slash piles and small snags.  In some areas in the 19th Century, there was a decline of House Wrens, which is blamed on the introduction of the House Sparrow because they compete for nesting cavities.  In Washington and North America as a whole, the House Wren population has been on the rise since 1966, increasing an average of 8.3% per year in Washington and 1.6% per year in North America, based on Breeding Bird Survey data.  This increase may be of concern since House Wrens destroy nests of other species, and compete with other, less common cavity-nesters.	The House Wren is a small, brown bird with few readily apparent field marks.  It is slender and gray-brown, lighter in color overall and with a longer tail than the Winter Wren.  Its wings and tail are mottled, but its back and belly are fairly clear.		1	House Wrens inhabit gardens, hedgerows, brushy woods, wetlands, and other edges.  They use a variety of habitats, as long as they have a dense shrub layer.	House Wrens are common and widespread from mid-May to the end of August at lower elevations in eastern Washington, outside of the hottest parts of the Columbia Basin. In western Washington, they are more scattered, common in the dry prairie habitat in the San Juan Islands (San Juan County), and uncommon in similar dry spots around Sequim (Clallam County) and Ft. Lewis (Pierce County). They are also uncommon in the summer in residential areas in Bellingham (Whatcom County), on Whidbey and Camano Islands (Island County), Everett and Marysville (Snohomish County), north Seattle (King County), and in the Nisqually National Wildlife Refuge (Thurston County).  They are abundant breeders in Clark County, especially at the Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge.	The secretive House Wren hops about on the ground and in the low understory with its short tail held up.  It often punctures the eggs of nearby nesting birds, both of its own and other species.	Crawling insects and spiders are the primary prey of House Wrens.	Prefers brushy habitats in open forests (including burns, clearcuts), wetland and forest edges, and residential areas. Common and widespread in Kittitas County at middle elevations; records extend up over 5,000 feet at Colockum Pass and Naneum Ridge. Absent from dry, rocky terrain bordering Columbia River. On Westside, fairly common but local in Island County, rare in King County lowlands. Only one BBA record from Kitsap County but breeding confirmed on Bainbridge Island in 2003, beyond close of atlas period. Predicted breeding range mapped by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) does not extend to Vashon Island and Kitsap County.	These birds have a tendency to nest around human homes and in birdhouses, thus the name House Wren.  The male defends its territory and attracts females by singing.  The birds start a number of nests, and the female selects one to finish.  They are usually monogamous, but the male may have more than one mate at a time, and the female may raise a second brood with a new mate, leaving her young for the first male to raise.  House Wrens build their nests in cavities, both natural and artificial.  The nests are usually near the ground, but may be high up in trees as well, especially in the mountains.  The nest's foundation is a large pile of twigs, and the nest itself is a cup built of soft plant fibers, hair, and feathers.  The female incubates 6 to 7 eggs for 12 to 15 days.  Both parents feed the chicks, which leave the nest after 12 to 18 days.	Most House Wrens migrate to the southern United States or north and central Mexico for the winter.  Some of Washington's birds move up-slope in late summer after the breeding season, and most have left Washington by late September.  There are a few accepted records of House Wrens in southeastern Washington in the winter, but they were living in heated stock sheds.  In the spring, males tend to arrive before females.	house_wren	HOWR			
461	66	Troglodytes	pacificus	Pacific Wren	Common resident west. Fairly common east.	LC	The Pacific Wren is the only wren found in the Old World, where it is known simply as the 'Wren.'  Although Pacific Wrens are still common in Washington, Breeding Bird Survey data show a significant decline of 5.6% per year from 1982 to 1991.	In 2010, the American Ornithologist's Union split the North American populations of Winter Wren into two separate species, the Eastern Wren of eastern North America and Pacific Wren of the West. The Old World counterpart is now a separate species as well, called Eurasian Wren. The Pacific Wren is a tiny woodland bird whose song is as elaborate as its plumage is drab. This wren is dark brown and mottled overall, with a buff eye-line. It has a short tail that it holds upright.		1	Pacific Wrens are found most often in closed-canopy conifer forests at all elevations, although they also live in other forest types as long as there is dense understory.  Within these forests, brush piles, fallen logs, and stream banks are all good places to find Pacific Wrens.	The Pacific Wren is a common, permanent resident in all forested habitats of western Washington, including large, forested city parks.  They are especially common in the dense undergrowth of coastal forests.  In mountainous regions, Pacific Wrens are summer residents, breeding as high as 6,000 feet on Mount Rainier.  In eastern Washington, they are less common but can still be found year round in moist coniferous forests, usually above the Ponderosa pine zone and confined to north-facing slopes with dense trees and water nearby.	Often seen creeping about among the aforementioned structures, Pacific Wrens glean prey from foliage, trunks, the ground, and from the surface of the water.  In spring, males sing their extended complex songs from mid-level and high perches, and also from low down, in the understory, on fallen logs, etc.	Insects and spiders are the predominant prey of the Pacific Wren.	Up until 2010, our Pacific Wren was considered conspecific with the Eurasian Wren, which is the only wren found in the Old World, where it is known simply as the 'Wren.' Although Pacific Wrens are still common in Washington, Breeding Bird Survey data show a significant decline of 5.6% per year from 1982 to 1991.	Males establish and defend territories and attract females by singing.  Males may nest with more than one female at a time.  Nests are built in natural cavities, usually within six feet of the ground.  The cavities can be in upturned roots of downed trees or rotten stumps, old woodpecker holes, rock crevices, under porches, or any other low cavity.  Male and female build the nest together on a platform of twigs.  The nest cup is made of grass, weeds, moss, and rootlets, lined with hair and feathers.  The male may build several dummy nests that remain unlined.  The female incubates 5 to 6 eggs for 12 to 16 days.  Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at about 19 days.	On the coast and in the milder Washington lowlands, the Pacific Wren is a permanent resident.  In colder parts of the state, they leave late in the fall for wintering grounds throughout the western United States.  They return early in the spring.	pacific_wren	PAWR			
462	57	Tryngites	subruficollis	Buff-breasted Sandpiper	Rare fall migrant.	NT	The Canadian Wildlife Service estimates the current population of Buff-breasted Sandpipers at only 15,000 birds.  Although they were formerly abundant, hunting brought the population close to extinction in the early 20th Century. This species' restricted range, with much of the population remaining in vulnerable areas, leaves it at risk. Human development in its range has increased disturbance and brought more predators, both of which are significant threats to this species.  Habitat loss on the wintering grounds in Argentina and Bolivia has also contributed to their decline.  The Buff-breasted Sandpiper is on the watch list of Partners in Flight.	This upland shorebird has an unstreaked buff-colored breast, yellow legs, and a brown and buff mottled back.  It has a dark tail and rump, streaked like the rest of the back.  Its short, narrow bill and round head give it a plover-like appearance.  Its underwings are silvery-white. Breeding and non-breeding adults look quite similar.  Juveniles are darker and grayer, and have a scaly pattern on their backs. Almost all birds seen in Washington are juveniles.		1	Buff-breasted Sandpipers breed in dry Arctic tundra.  Outside of the breeding season, they are seen in short-grass prairie and other grassland habitats. They winter in the grasslands of southern South America. In migration, they can be found on grassy areas such as golf courses, cemeteries, mowed lawns, and airfields.  They are often seen in the baked mud around drying rivers, lakes, and reservoirs. They can also be seen along sandy beaches and open, weedy meadows.	Buff-breasted Sandpipers are a rare sighting in Washington. Adult Buff-breasted Sandpipers do not migrate through Washington, but juveniles are seen on the coast, in Grays Harbor and at Willapa Bay, from mid-August to mid-September.  There are very few records from eastern Washington, which may seem surprising at first, but grasslands are very dry in eastern Washington by late summer and early fall, and may not provide good habitat.	Buff-breasted Sandpipers roost in large flocks, although their numbers in Washington are not large enough for single-species flocks. While foraging, they walk steadily along with a high-stepping gait, bobbing their elevated heads looking for prey on the ground. They may run and stop, making quick directional changes like plovers do.	Buff-breasted Sandpipers eat mostly insects.		Groups of males form leks, or display grounds in the tundra breeding areas.  Leks are typically fairly dense, but these birds have large display territories, up to 8 acres in size, so the entire lek may spread across a large area. Typical Buff-breasted Sandpiper leks are made up of 10 or fewer males.  Females come to the leks where the males display their light underwings, one wing at a time. They mate on the lek, and the female leaves. The male provides no parental care.  The female finds a spot on the ground, often on a moss hummock near water. There, she scrapes out a shallow depression and lines it with leaves, sedge, moss, or lichen. She incubates four eggs for 23-25 days.  The young leave the nest within a day of hatching. They feed themselves, but the female tends them. The young begin to fly at 16-20 days.	Most Buff-breasted Sandpipers migrate from Arctic breeding grounds across the Great Plains, to the Pampas of southern South America and back.  Juveniles spread out across the country, many reaching the East Coast and some spreading west to the Pacific.	buff-breasted_sandpiper				
463	67	Turdus	iliacus	Redwing		NT		A Redwing wintering in a neighborhood in Olympia (Thurston County) was seen by hundreds of birders between 20 December 2004 and 14 March 2005.		1								redwing				
464	67	Turdus	migratorius	American Robin	Common resident.	LC	Robins have experienced significant population increases in the past 40 years, probably due to a combination of a decreased use of pesticides and an increase in human development and suburban sprawl that has created more edge habitat, lawns, and ornamental plantings for foraging. Robins' susceptibility to pesticides and their conspicuous nature make them a useful indicator of chemical pollution.	The American Robin is a large, sturdy songbird with long legs, a light yellowish bill, and a long tail. It has an unstreaked, rusty-orange breast and a dark gray-brown back. White spots surrounding the eye look like a broken eye-ring. Males and females are similar in appearance, although females are less brightly colored. The young, like the young of most other thrushes, are spotted.		1	Robins breed in the widest variety of habitats of any Washington songbird. They are common in almost all habitats and most elevations throughout the state, except for large, dry, cultivated fields, alpine rocks and ice, and dense, unbroken rainforest. The robin is mainly a bird of fields, open woodlands, and forest edges, and it takes advantage of the edges and clearings provided by human development.	Robins are found throughout the state of Washington. They are common and easy to spot statewide.	Outside of the breeding season, robins tend to form large flocks, often feeding in berry-producing trees.  During the breeding season, robins forage on the ground. They move about by both running and hopping. Robins form monogamous pair bonds that last throughout the breeding season.	During the breeding season, American Robins forage primarily on soft invertebrates such as earthworms and ground-dwelling insects. In winter, their diet shifts to berries and other fruit.	Most ubiquitous breeding species in four-county area, found wherever trees occur; absent only on bare rock and permanent snowfields. Prefers vicinity of towns, farmhouses, and wetlands. West of Cascade crest, common throughout all habitats at low and moderate elevation. Fairly common but local in forested landscapes at higher elevations, becoming uncommon in subalpine parkland. In Kittitas County, common in forest zones but less common at higher elevations and in shrub-steppe such as on Yakima Training Center and arid sites near Columbia River.	Females perform most of the nest building, although the males may help. The nest is typically built on the horizontal branch of a tree, 6-25 feet off the ground. The cup-shaped nest is made of grasses and twigs, held together with mud and lined with plant fiber and fine grass. The female typically lays 4 pale blue eggs and incubates them alone. Both parents feed the young. Parents aggressively defend the nest.	Most robins are short-distance migrants, but some do not migrate at all. American Robins can be found year round in Washington, although most often the birds that breed in Washington migrate south and are replaced for the winter by birds that nest farther north.  Large migratory flocks can be seen in spring and fall.	american_robin	AMRO			
465	67	Turdus	naumanni	Dusky Thrush		LC		The Washington Bird Records Committee has accepted a record of a Dusky Thrush observed at Mount Vernon (Skagit County) on 27 June 2002.		1								dusky_thrush				
466	46	Tympanuchus	phasianellus	Sharp-tailed Grouse	Rare resident east.	LC	Sharp-tailed Grouse have undergone major declines throughout North America.  There are six subspecies recognized, and the Columbian Sharp-tailed Grouse, the subspecies found in Washington, is now the rarest.  Historically plentiful throughout the Columbia Basin, Sharp-tailed Grouse were heavily hunted until harvest levels were reduced in 1920.  By this time, however, much of their grassland habitat had been converted to agriculture, and Sharp-tailed Grouse were already gone from most of their historic range in Washington.  Continued conversion of shrub-steppe habitat to irrigated agriculture, increased settlement, and intensive livestock grazing on remaining patches of habitat contributed to further declines.  By the 1950s, Sharp-tailed Grouse had disappeared from at least six counties where they were formerly abundant.  In 1970 the population was estimated to be 7,430 birds.  In 1997 it was estimated at between 700-1000 birds.  There are currently eight isolated subpopulations in Washington, with the Sharp-tailed Grouse occupying a mere 20% of its former range in this state.  All the subpopulations are small, and four are highly threatened, with fewer than 25 birds in each group.  Two of the remaining populations are made up of fewer than 100 individuals, with two fairly stable populations on protected land.  Sharp-tailed Grouse are currently listed by Washington State as threatened species and by the Federal Government as species of special concern.  The Conservation Reserve Program helps private landowners set aside habitat for Sharp-tailed Grouse.  The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife is currently researching habitat requirements of Sharp-tailed Grouse in order to know how best to protect them in the future.	The Sharp-tailed Grouse is a large grouse with a sharply pointed tail, held straight up when displaying.  It is brown with white and dark spots, arranged in cryptic patterns.  The bird has light-colored undersides and a slight crest on its head.  Yellowish eyebrows and pinkish-purple air sacs at the sides of its neck are visible on the male when he displays.		1	Sharp-tailed Grouse live in grassy areas with patches of trees in the northern Columbia Basin.  Their primary habitat is the grass and shrub savanna in the three-tip sage and central arid steppe zones.  They are also found in grassy openings in the lowest edges of the Ponderosa pine zone.  In summer they spend most of their time in more open grasslands, while in the winter they make use of trees and shrubs for cover.	The Columbian subspecies historically ranged from southern British Columbia, along the eastern slope of the Cascades south to California, and east to Colorado and Utah.  In Washington, they currently remain in only eight isolated populations in Douglas, Lincoln, and Okanogan Counties.  The areas with the largest subpopulations are Dyer Hill in Douglas County, Swanson Lakes in Lincoln County, Tunk Valley, and Nespelem in Okanogan County.	Males gather on a communal breeding ground, or lek, to display for females.  When displaying, males point their tails up, spread their wings, hold their heads low, and stamp their feet.  While doing this, they inflate and deflate the air sacs in their breasts, creating a booming sound.	In the spring, Sharp-tailed Grouse forage mostly for leaves, green shoots, and flowers.  In the summer, they forage on the ground, with blades of grass making up over 50% of their diet.  Flower parts make up another 25% of the breeding-season diet.  Insects, especially grasshoppers, are also an important food item at this time of year, particularly among the young.  In the fall, the diet becomes more varied and is made up of seeds, berries, leaves, and waste grains.  In the winter, Sharp-tailed Grouse forage in trees and shrubs for buds.		The female selects a male at the lek, mates with him, and then leaves to find a nesting spot.  Nests are typically a shallow depression located on the ground under a shrub or thick clump of grass, often sparsely lined with grass, leaves, or ferns.  She lays an average of 12 eggs (ranging from 5-17).  Shortly after hatching, the young leave the nest.  The female continues to tend the young and lead them to feeding areas, although they feed themselves.	There is no major migration, although they may move several miles between seasons to reach optimal habitats for summer and winter.	sharp-tailed_grouse				
467	68	Tyrannus	forficatus	Scissor-tailed Flycatcher		LC		One May and one September record, both from Potholes (Grant County).		1								scissor-tailed_flycatcher				
468	68	Tyrannus	melancholicus	Tropical Kingbird		LC		Casual fall visitor (October'December) to western Washington coastal lowlands.		1								tropical_kingbird				
469	68	Tyrannus	savana	Fork-tailed Flycatcher		LC		One record, from Chinook River Valley in September 1995.		1								fork-tailed_flycatcher				
470	68	Tyrannus	tyrannus	Eastern Kingbird	Fairly common summer east. Rare west.	LC	Although development and conversion of small farms to more intensive agriculture with fewer shelterbelts have reduced nesting habitat for Eastern Kingbirds, its population in Washington has been stable between 1966 and 2002. Maintaining shelterbelts and forested corridors along streams is necessary to protect Eastern Kingbird habitat in Washington.	The Eastern Kingbird is gray-black above and white below. Its most distinctive field mark is the white band at the tip of its black tail. Like other flycatchers it maintains an upright posture. It has a small patch of red feathers in its crown that can only be seen when it displays.		1	In Washington, Eastern Kingbirds forage in habitat similar to that of Western Kingbirds, open shrub-steppe and agricultural areas. Their breeding habitat, however, is quite different. They nest in hardwood stands, almost always on or near rivers, streams, or other wetlands. Because of their different foraging and breeding habitats, they are commonly found at edges where these habitats meet.	Mostly an eastern Washington species, the Eastern Kingbird breeds in a few areas in Western Washington--in Pierce, Snohomish, and Skagit Counties. In eastern Washington they are common throughout the shrub-steppe region near lakes, ponds, marshes, and farmland.	During the breeding season, Eastern Kingbirds typically do not flock, but during migration and on the wintering grounds, they gather in large groups. They generally forage in short bursts, flying out from the perch to grab prey in mid-air, and then returning to the same spot. They also glean prey from foliage or pick food items off the ground, especially in cooler weather when many insects don't fly. These aggressive flycatchers can often be seen perched on a fence wire or treetop, or flying with wings fluttering downward.	In spring and summer Eastern Kingbirds eat mostly insects. As the summer progresses, they eat more and more fruit. On the wintering grounds they eat primarily berries.	Common at low and middle elevations east of Cascade crest in steppe and agricultural habitats. Often breeds in shrubby hardwood groves in wetlands or along streams. Rare and local breeder west of Cascades, as at Spencer Island near Everett, just north of our area in Snohomish County. One possible BBA record near Duvall. Nested nearby in clearcut at Lake Joy in 1978 and 1979 (Hunn 1982); two previous King County nesting records from 1893 and 1906 (Jewett et al. 1953).	During courtship the male performs elaborate display flights. Monogamous pairs will often re-pair in successive years and reclaim the same territory. The female builds the nest in a low deciduous tree or shrub, on a utility tower, or in a tree growing out of the water. The nest is large and bulky, made of weeds, bark, and twigs, and lined with plant down, hair, and feathers. The female incubates the two to five eggs for 14 to 17 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest and take their first flights at 16 to 18 days. The parents continue to feed the young for another three to five weeks after they fledge.	As their name implies, Eastern Kingbirds are historically a bird of the eastern part of the US, and their migration patterns trace their westward expansion. Eastern Kingbirds arrive in Washington by late May, from the east, making them one of Washington's latest spring migrants. They begin to leave in August, with the last few remaining until September. They head east over the Rocky Mountains and travel south to South America from there. They travel in flocks and migrate by day as far south as Argentina.	eastern_kingbird	EAKI			
471	68	Tyrannus	verticalis	Western Kingbird	Common summer east. Rare west.	LC	Western Kingbirds are more widespread across eastern Washington than Eastern Kingbirds because, unlike Eastern Kingbirds, they are not restricted to areas near water. They have adjusted well to increased development in their breeding habitat, making use of man-made structures for perching and nesting. During the 20th Century, they expanded their range eastward and have increased in number across much of their range, including Washington. At one time they were more common in western Washington, but numbers have declined as the prairie habitat has disappeared. Pesticides are a concern across much of their range and have been detected in the blood of many Western Kingbirds. However there have been no signs of eggshell thinning. The Breeding Bird Survey shows a small, not statistically significant decline in Washington between 1980 and 2002.	Except for the Tropical Kingbird (a rare visitor in fall), the Western Kingbird is the largest flycatcher in Washington. It is light gray-green above with darker wings and a black tail with white outer edges. Its breast is light gray, and its belly and underwings are bright yellow. It has red feathers in its crown that can be seen only when it displays.		1	Western Kingbirds inhabit open areas with scattered trees or utility poles for nesting. They are especially common around ranch buildings and corrals where perches are plentiful.	Western Kingbirds are common from May to August in the open lowlands of eastern Washington, especially in farmland. In western Washington, they are rare breeders, with breeding confirmed in Pierce, Skagit, and Whatcom Counties. Migrants can also be seen rarely throughout western Washington including the outer coast during the spring and fall.	Aggressive and conspicuous, Western Kingbirds can easily be found perching on fence wires all over eastern Washington. They wait on these perches and then make quick flights out to grab prey from the air or off the ground. They commonly hover over a field and then drop to the ground after prey.	Insects, both flying and crawling, make up the majority of the Western Kingbird's diet. The birds also eat small berries and other fruit.	Common in open habitats at low to middle elevation east of Cascade crest. Widely recorded in Yakima River Valley from Cle Elum to Yakima Canyon and near Columbia River. Rare nester at low elevations west of Cascade crest in Washington; may breed very locally in King County, where recorded as possible or probable near Auburn and in Snoqualmie Valley.	In Washington, Western Kingbirds usually nest in a Ponderosa pine or on a utility pole next to a transformer. They also nest on building ledges, in sheds, or in other birds' nests. Unlike Eastern Kingbirds, they do not need water nearby to nest. Monogamous pairs are formed after the male performs an elaborate display flight, twisting and flipping through the air. The female builds a cup of grass, weeds, twigs, and plant fibers, and lines it with feathers, plant down, and hair. She incubates three to four eggs for about two weeks. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 16 to 17 days. The parents continue to feed the young for another two to three weeks.	Western Kingbirds usually arrive in Washington in late April or early May. They leave for southern Mexico and Central America in August, traveling alone or in small flocks.	western_kingbird	WEKI			
472	69	Tyto	alba	Barn Owl	Uncommon to fairly common resident.	LC	There is general concern that this widespread species is declining, but owls are difficult to survey for population trends.  They seem to be expanding their range in the lower Columbia Basin.  They do not appear to do well in harsh winters, and die-offs are often observed in severe winters, which may limit their numbers in some parts of Washington.  As human populations continue to expand, more and more habitat is destroyed, although Barn Owls do respond well to nest-box programs.  In recent years, farmers have begun to recognize their value for pest control (a family of Barn Owls can kill about 1,300 rats a year) and have provided nesting sites, which may help in the face of habitat destruction.  Roadside collisions are a major cause of mortality and may threaten population levels in some areas.	The Barn Owl is a gray-and-tawny owl with a white, heart-shaped face and dark eyes.   It has long legs.  This owl is mostly white underneath, but may be buffy or spotted on its breast.  The male and female look similar, but the female tends to be more densely spotted or darker below.  The female is slightly larger than the male, generally with a rounder face.		1	Barn Owls occur worldwide, and are usually found in open or semi-open habitats.  In Washington, they are closely associated with agricultural areas or basalt cliffs, as well as forest openings, wetlands, and other relatively large, open spaces.  In winter, they roost in dense conifers or barns.	Barn Owls are fairly common permanent residents in the lowlands of eastern and western Washington.  They are found on the coast in Pacific and Grays Harbor Counties, but if found farther north on the Olympic Peninsula, they are rare. They are also found in open areas on the north side of the Olympic Peninsula, near Sequim.	Barn Owls bob their heads and weave back and forth, giving them a spooky appearance.  They hunt mostly at night, flying low over open ground, listening and watching for prey.  Their vision is adapted for low light levels, and their hearing is highly precise.  Barn Owls can accurately locate prey entirely by sound and strike successfully in total darkness.  No other animal tested has as great an ability to locate prey by sound.	Small mammals (mostly rodents) are the main prey.  When voles are abundant, they become a major source of food, and in these years, some Barn Owls may be able to raise additional broods.	Fairly common in open habitats at low elevation in western counties and at moderate elevation in agricultural areas of Kittitas Valley. Relatively low detection rate largely attributable to owl's highly nocturnal habits and spotty nocturnal BBA surveying, compounded by observer access problems to nesting barns. Present within urban districts where adequate open habitats exist, although underrepresented there by BBA records. Predicted range mapped throughout eastern Kittitas County steppe by Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997) not supported by BBA records. Stepniewski (1999) notes that Barn Owls only appeared in nearby Yakima County with conversion of shrub-steppe to irrigated agriculture.	The male attracts a female with a display flight, and brings food to the female during courtship, which begins in winter.  They form a long-term pair bond (that often lasts as long as both members are alive), and nesting begins early in the year, with most egg-laying between March and May.  Nests are located on cliffs, in haystacks, hollow trees, burrows in irrigation canals, or in barns, old buildings, or other cavities.  Barn Owls use barns and buildings less often in eastern Washington than in other parts of their range, as many of these nesting sites have been taken over by Great Horned Owls.  They do not build a true nest, but much of the debris around the nest, including pellets, is formed into a depression.  The female lays 2-11 eggs (usually about 5), and incubates them for 29-34 days.  She begins to incubate as soon as the first egg is laid, so the young hatch 2-3 days apart.  The male brings her food while she incubates.  In the first two weeks after the young hatch, the female stays on the nest to brood them, and the male brings food for the female and the owlets.  He delivers the food to the female, and she feeds the young.  After about two weeks, the female begins to leave the young and hunt as well.  The young first start to fly at about 60 days, although they return to the nest site at night for a few more weeks.  Barn Owls generally raise one or two broods per year, but when food is abundant, they may raise three.	Barn Owls are considered resident, but some young birds wander great distances. Migratory movements have been recorded in both juvenile and adult birds.	barn_owl	BANO			
473	5	Uria	aalge	Common Murre	Common resident coast.	LC	Numbers fluctuate annually, in response to food supply and climatic events. Common Murres are the most frequent avian victims of oil spills along the Washington coast. Other threats to the population include over-fishing and gill nets. The population experienced a crash as a result of the 1983 El Niño event, dropping from 30,000 to fewer than 3,000 birds. Some populations have since recovered, but others have yet to rebound, leaving the current population in Washington at about one-third the former level. Common Murres are also highly sensitive to disturbance by humans, whether they are on foot, in a boat, or in a low-flying plane. When disturbed, the birds may knock eggs and chicks out of the nest sites in their haste to fly clear of the disturbance. The unguarded chicks and eggs are easy prey for gulls and other avian predators.	Less chunky than the other large alcids, the Common Murre has a short neck and a long, straight bill. It is black above and white below with a white wing-bar and white sides faintly streaked with dark. During the breeding season, the head is solid black, but outside of the breeding season, the chin and lower half of the face are white, with a black line descending from the back of the eye through the white area.		1	Common Murres typically nest on wide, open ledges on rocky cliffs, although only small numbers in Washington nest on cliffs. Most colonies in this state are located on sea stacks and flat-topped islands that are partially vegetated or bare. They spend much of the time on the open ocean and in large bays. They are found closer to rocky shorelines during the breeding season, and farther offshore during the non-breeding season.	Common Murres nest at 18 locations along the outer Washington coastline, with as many as 10,000 birds to a colony. They arrive on the colonies in April and may be found there until September. Major colonies are located at Point Grenville, Split Rock, Willoughby Island, Quillayute Needles, and Carroll and Jagged Islands.  They can be seen in these areas year round, and in deep-water, inland-marine habitats as well in the fall and winter. They are fairly common on inland waters at other times of the year.	Outside of the breeding season, Common Murres are almost always seen in the water. On land, they sit upright. They swim and dive well, and can dive more than 150 feet below the water's surface.  Their flight is labored.	Most of the diet is made up of small fish, although a wide variety of sea creatures including crustaceans, marine worms, and squid are also taken.		Relative to their size, Common Murres have the most densely packed nesting colonies of any bird, with 28-34 birds per square meter.  Nests are located so close together that incubating adults actually touch their neighbors on both sides. They do not build nests. Common Murres first breed at 4-5 years, and the female lays a single egg each year. Incubation lasts 4-5 weeks, and both sexes incubate and feed the newly hatched chick. Two to three weeks after hatching, before it is able to fly, the chick leaves the colony with one of its parents (usually the male) and moves into the water.	Common Murres are permanent residents in many areas, but far-northern populations migrate south when the water freezes. Washington's breeding population does not appear to migrate.	common_murre	COMU			
474	5	Uria	lomvia	Thick-billed Murre		LC		Casual fall and winter visitor on outer coast and pelagic waters, accidental in Straits of Juan de Fuca and Georgia.		1								thick-billed_murre				
475	41	Vermivora	celata	Orange-crowned Warbler	Common summer west. Fairly common east. Rare winter.	LC	The population of Orange-crowned Warblers appears to be stable throughout their range. They can tolerate moderate levels of disturbance. Livestock overgrazing in many areas has resulted in the loss of understory habitat, but intensive logging, especially in western Washington, has increased the amount of habitat. Despite this habitat creation, the Breeding Bird Survey has reported a significant decline in Orange-crowned Warblers in Washington since 1966.	Orange-crowned Warblers are very small warblers with slender bills, broken eye-rings, and partial eye-lines. They are one of the drabbest warblers, olive-green above and yellow below, with brighter yellow undertail coverts. Two subspecies breed in Washington (divided by the Columbia Basin). The western Washington breeders are brighter yellow than the eastern Washington breeding form. Both sexes can have an orange-brown crown. Females' crowns are generally browner, or lack the color variation entirely. The orange markings are most visible on males in the spring, but can be difficult to see, especially at other times of the year.		1	Orange-crowned Warblers are commonly found in shrubby thickets and deciduous woodlands, especially those with aspen and willow. During migration, they are often found at higher elevations, in alder and mountain ash stands, or along lowland streams in red-osier dogwood and Himalayan blackberry thickets. Weedy fields with dense clumps of cover are important in migration and at wintering sites, and are their preferred habitat in fall and winter in eastern North America.	Orange-crowned Warblers are very common birds in the lowlands of western Washington from April through September. Numbers decrease through the fall, and they are rare in winter. They return as early as late March. They generally nest below 3,000 feet, but can be found at higher elevations along a number of Cascade passes and on the eastern slopes of the Cascades. The eastern Washington subspecies can be found in the northeast and southeast corners of the state from late April through September.	Although Orange-crowned Warblers are mostly considered solitary birds, they can sometimes be found in mixed flocks with chickadees, kinglets, juncos, vireos, and other warblers, usually post-breeding only or in migration with other migrant species. They usually stay low, in bushes or small trees, and often flick their tails. They forage in the foliage, gleaning food from the undersides of leaves and flowers. The song of the Orange-crowned Warbler is an accelerating trill that drops in pitch at the end.	Orange-crowned Warblers eat mostly insects, but supplement that diet with berries, suet, tree sap, and flower nectar. They pierce the base of a flower to get at the nectar, and visit woodpecker and sapsucker holes for tree sap. The young eat almost entirely insect larvae.	Most widespread breeding warbler in western counties, where common at low and middle elevations in shrubby growth in young hardwood stands, less so in mature forests. Absent from high mountains on both sides of Cascade crest north of Snoqualmie Pass. Farther south, spills over crest into moist forests, with single breeding confirmation at Stampede Pass. Records thinly scattered farther east in Kittitas County, mostly in lower forest zones. True status there remains unclear, as many May and late-July records possibly represent migrants.	Males arrive first on the breeding grounds and establish territories. Returning males often use the same territory as the previous year. Monogamous pairs form shortly after the females return. The female chooses the nest site, which is usually on the ground under dense vegetation, but may be in a shrub, low tree, fern, or vine. The female builds a small, open nest cup out of leaves, moss, small twigs, and bark, lined with fine grass and hair. The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 11 to 13 days. Both members of the pair feed the young. The young leave the nest 10 to 13 days after hatching, before they can fly well. The parents continue feeding the young for a few days after they leave the nest. Pairs generally raise a single brood each year.	Orange-crowned Warblers are short- to medium-distance migrants. Migrants arrive in Washington early in the spring. The fall departure is spread out, with the last migrants leaving as late as November. Many migrate as far south as Mexico, but they also winter in California, and a few remain in Washington through the year.	orange-crowned_warbler	OCWA			
476	41	Vermivora	chrysoptera	Golden-winged Warbler		NT		The male is gray overall with a yellow patch on the wing, black mask bordered by white, black throat, and yellow crown; the female is similar but less strongly marked. This species nests from southern Manitoba eastward across the northern tier of states and southern Ontario to New England, and southward in the Appalachians to northern Georgia; it winters from southern Mexico to Colombia. Like the Blue-winged Warbler&#8212;a close relative with which it hybridizes where their ranges meet&#8212;the Golden-winged is a trans-Gulf migrant, and hence one of the rarest vagrant &#8220;eastern&#8221; warblers in the West. Oregon has two accepted records, Idaho one, and British Columbia none. Washington&#8217;s single accepted record was netted and banded at Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge (Spokane County) on 20 August 1998.

<I>Revised August 2007<I/>		1								golden-winged_warbler				
477	41	Vermivora	peregrina	Tennessee Warbler		LC		In late summer and fall, when 13 of the 16 accepted Washington records have occurred, the Tennessee Warbler is a plain yellowish-green bird with a light eyebrow and a thin, dark line through the eye and can easily be confused with its close relative, the Orange-crowned Warbler&#8212;an abundant migrant and summer resident in the state. The most obvious differences are the Tennessee&#8217;s shorter tail and white or near-white undertail coverts that contrast with the grayish or greenish breast, and the absence of the Orange-crowned&#8217;s streaking on the underparts. The song, although rarely heard in Washington, is also quite different. Tennessee Warblers in breeding plumage are noticeably grayer (less greenish) than fall birds. Confusion with vireos is also possible, but note the warbler&#8217;s thin, sharply pointed bill.

The breeding range of the Tennessee Warbler extends from coast to coast in the forests of Canada, barely grazing the U.S. in Minnesota and New England. The wintering grounds extend from southern Mexico through Central America to Colombia. Although this warbler nests in British Columbia and Alberta south almost to the Montana border, its migration route lies east of the Continental Divide. Vagrant Tennessee Warblers occur with some frequency in the West, predominantly in fall. Idaho has about 30 records and the species is annual in Oregon, where it is no longer on the state review list. Ten of Washington&#8217;s records are from west of the Cascades and six from east. One long-staying bird was present into January at Satsop (Grays Harbor County).

<I>Revised October 2007<I/>		1								tennessee_warbler				
478	41	Vermivora	pinus	Blue-winged Warbler		LC		Distinctive in all plumages, the Blue-winged Warbler is mostly bright yellow with a greenish-tinged back, blue-gray wings with two white wingbars, and a dark line through the eye on an otherwise plain face. It breeds in the Midwest and Northeast, from the Great Lakes south to northern Alabama, and winters on the Atlantic slope of Mexico and in northern Central America. Migration takes place mostly across the Gulf of Mexico; hence the Blue-winged is one of the rarest vagrant &#8220;eastern&#8221; warblers in the West. Oregon has three records and Idaho one or two; there are none for British Columbia. Washington&#8217;s single accepted record occurred at the Anacortes ferry dock (Skagit County) on 17 September 1990.

<I>Revised August 2007<I/>		1								blue-winged_warbler				
479	41	Vermivora	ruficapilla	Nashville Warbler	Common summer resident, mostly east.	LC	Range-wide, the population appears stable, although much of the Nashville Warbler's wintering range in Mexico is at risk of development. In addition, the wooded area along rivers, a habitat favored by Nashville Warblers, is one of the most commonly human-altered habitats in the western United States. In Washington, however, the Breeding Bird Survey has recorded a non-significant increase since 1966. This increase may be the result of clear-cuts that generate shrubby habitat. Thus the habitat created by logging may counterbalance the habitat lost in riparian areas for this species. Nashville Warblers are especially vulnerable to Brown-headed Cowbird nest parasitism.	The Nashville Warbler is closely related to the Orange-crowned Warbler. The two species are similar in size and shape, but have distinct markings. Nashville Warblers have bright yellow undersides extending from their undertail coverts to their throats, and small white patches on their bellies. They have olive-green wings and light gray heads with distinct, white eye-rings. Males and females look similar, but the adult male has a rufous crown that is less distinct in the female. For both sexes, the patch of color is difficult to see in the field.		1	Nashville Warblers are usually found in hardwood and shrubby habitats. In Washington, these are often located at openings within coniferous forests, clear-cuts, wetlands, rivers, and along brushy hillsides, at low to middle elevations.	The Nashville Warbler is primarily an eastern Washington species. These birds are common in appropriate habitats throughout the eastern part of the state from mid-April to late August. In western Washington, they can be found in scattered pockets in western Clark and Skamania Counties and along the upper Skagit River (Skagit and Whatcom Counties). Some years a small number can be found migrating through western Washington. They were formerly found in the Garry oak woodlands of south Puget Sound (Pierce and Thurston Counties) as well.	Nashville Warblers can be seen feeding in mixed-species flocks in the fall, before and during migration. They search for food in the foliage, flicking their tails frequently. They usually forage fairly low in trees or bushes, although males generally forage higher up than females. They often find their prey at the tips of twigs, leaves, or catkins.	Insects, especially caterpillars, make up the majority of the Nashville Warbler's diet.	Common in shrubby edge habitats, young woodlands, and regenerating clearcuts in Kittitas County, mostly at moderate elevations. Handful of breeding records in similar habitats from remote areas below treeline along Cascade crest in both King and Kittitas Counties, including vicinity of Naches Pass, Tacoma Pass, Snowshoe Butte, Stampede Pass, and Stevens Pass. Uncommon on west side of crest as migrant into mid-May.	Nashville Warblers form monogamous pairs during the nesting season. The female builds the nest on the ground, usually in a low depression in moss, grass, ferns, or under bushes. The nest is an open cup made of leaves, ferns, and bark strips, lined with grass, hair, and needles, often with a rim of moss. The female incubates 4 to 5 eggs for 11 to 12 days. The male feeds the female on the nest while she incubates, and may take a turn at incubation as well. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest 9 to 11 days after hatching.	Nashville Warblers migrate, mostly at night, to central and southern Mexico in the fall. Their fall migration is generally spread over a longer period than their spring trip, which is concentrated over a shorter time period.	nashville_warbler	NAWA			
480	70	Vireo	cassinii	Cassin's Vireo	Fairly common summer resident.	LC	In some areas, Cassin's Vireos are heavily parasitized by Brown-headed Cowbirds. They are listed on the Audubon~Washington Watch List as a species-of-concern in the state, although, according to the Breeding Bird Survey, the population in Washington increased significantly between 1980 and 2000.	Formerly known as the Solitary Vireo, the Cassin's Vireo is now one of three separate species. Cassin's Vireos are olive above and whitish below, with a yellowish wash on their sides and flanks, white throats, and gray heads. They have two white wing-bars and distinctive white eye-rings that extend to the brow, making the birds look as if they are wearing spectacles.		1	The Cassin's Vireo is the only Washington vireo characteristically found in conifer forests. While these birds appear to prefer dry conifer forests of Douglas fir and Ponderosa pine, they can also be found in mixed coniferous and broadleaved forests, and may prefer to nest in hardwood trees.	Cassin's Vireos are fairly common and widespread in eastern Washington in lower- and moderate-elevation conifer forests in the eastern Cascades, the northeastern corner, and the Blue Mountains. Although generally uncommon in western Washington, they are locally common along major river valleys and dry forests in the Puget Trough, such as the San Juan Islands, the northeastern Olympic Peninsula, Fort Lewis (Pierce County), and Ross Lake (Whatcom County).	Cassin's Vireos are inconspicuous as they work their way along branches, twigs, and leaves, looking for food high up in the trees. Occasionally they fly out to grab flying insects in midair, but most of the time they glean from various surfaces. During spring and early summer, they sing incessantly, revealing their presence.	Insects are the primary diet, although Cassin's Vireos will sometimes eat berries and other small fruits, especially in winter.	Fairly common east of Cascade crest in dry forests at moderate elevations. Uncommon and local in western Washington along river valleys in Cascade foothills&#8212;where it favors conifer forests just uphill from rivers&#8212;and in dry, open coniferous forests in Puget Trough lowlands.	Cassin's Vireos build a bulky nest suspended in a low horizontal fork of a tree branch. Both members of the pair help build the nest, which is made of grass, bark strips, rootlets, and other plant fibers, lined with hair and plant down, and adorned on the outside with moss and pine needles. Both parents incubate the three to five eggs for 12 to 14 days, and both feed the young, which leave the nest at about two weeks of age.	Some of these Neotropical migrants winter as far north as the southwestern United States, but most winter in Mexico. They arrive on the breeding grounds a bit earlier in spring, and stay a bit later in the fall than other vireos.	cassins_vireo	CAVI			
481	70	Vireo	flavifrons	Yellow-throated Vireo		LC		One record, from Spencer Island (Snohomish County) in October 1995.		1								yellow-throated_vireo				
482	70	Vireo	gilvus	Warbling Vireo	Common summer resident.	LC	Despite being a major host for Brown-headed Cowbirds, Warbling Vireos have increased in Washington since 1966. Forest clearing for logging and development has dramatically increased the amount of Warbling Vireo habitat in Washington, and Warbling Vireos are probably more common today than they were before European settlement.	The Warbling Vireo is a small bird, greenish-gray above, whitish below in spring, lightly washed with yellow below in fall. It has no wing-bars. It has a prominent white line above the eye and a faint grayish line below it.		1	The Warbling Vireo's typical habitat is open deciduous or shrubby mixed woodlands, especially where large trees are present. Warbling Vireos are often found in willow or cottonwood stands along rivers. They are not found in large, unbroken tracts of woods, but prefer smaller patches and edges, including logged areas, rural woodlots, and parks. They do not breed in conifer stands, but can be found in small patches of hardwood trees or shrubs within conifer forests. During migration they can be seen in a variety of lowland habitats, especially in red-osier dogwood.	Most Warbling Vireos arrive by late April and can be found in appropriate habitat until the end of August. During spring and fall migration, they are frequently seen in the lowlands. Look for Warbling Vireos feeding on red-osier dogwood berries in late August and early September as they fatten up prior to migration. This is one of the most common species in streamside deciduous forests in the Cascades. Warbling Vireos are also common in the shrubby hillsides east of the Cascades and in old higher-elevation clear-cuts (at least 3,000 feet) that have grown up to mid-successional size.	Warbling Vireos forage mostly high in the treetops, where they move along twigs and branches, looking for food among the leaves.	Insects make up 95% of the diet. Spiders and small berries make up the remaining 5%, with most berry-eating confined to the late summer and fall.	Common throughout in hardwood and mixed forests and thickets in forested landscapes. Forestry practices and human settlement have dramatically increased amount of available habitat, as Warbling Vireos thrive in hardwood regrowth following wholesale removal of conifer forests. Scarce or absent only in lowest, most arid rangeland near Columbia River and at highest elevations along Cascade crest. Less common in heavily settled lowlands about Puget Sound.	Warbling Vireos are monogamous. Nests are located in the periphery of deciduous trees and shrubs. Birds of the western subspecies place their nest within 30 feet of the ground, lower than those of the eastern subspecies. Both members of the pair build the nest, which is suspended from a horizontally forked branch. The nest is made of bark strips, grass, leaves, plant fibers, hair, and lichen. Both parents incubate the four eggs for 12 to 14 days. Both feed and tend the young for the 13 to 14 days they are in the nest and for up to two weeks after they leave it. Some pairs raise a second brood.	This highly migratory species winters in western Mexico and northern Central America, sometimes in shade-grown coffee plantations. Warbling Vireos begin arriving in Washington in late April and continue to arrive throughout May. They start to leave in early August, with the last few remaining until mid-September.	warbling_vireo	WAVI			
483	70	Vireo	griseus	White-eyed Vireo		LC		One record, from Vashon Island (King County) in July.		1								white-eyed_vireo				
484	70	Vireo	huttoni	Hutton's Vireo	Fairly common resident west.	LC	The Hutton's Vireo is only an infrequent host for Brown-headed Cowbirds, which nevertheless may have an impact on its population. In Washington, Hutton's Vireos have benefited from logging practices that have created shrubby second-growth stands, which include numerous hardwoods. Breeding Bird Survey records show a small, statistically insignificant, increase between 1966 and 2000.	Hutton's Vireo is olive-gray above and a drab lighter olive below.  It has a white eye-ring and two white wing-bars. It looks much like a Ruby-crowned Kinglet, but is larger, has a thicker bill, and has blue-gray legs and feet (in contrast to the kinglet's black legs and yellow feet.) Hutton's Vireo also lacks the black bar behind the lower white wing-bar that is present on the wing of the Ruby-crowned Kinglet.		1	In much of their range, Hutton's Vireos are associated with live-oak forests, but in Washington they are found in mixed coniferous/deciduous forests, especially near wetlands or forest openings. They are found only west of the Cascades, usually at lower elevations.	An uncommon species in low-elevation forests in western Washington, Hutton's Vireo is the only vireo found in Washington in winter. Although it is not common anywhere, it is fairly easy to find in the proper habitat, especially near the coast.	In winter, one or two Hutton's Vireos can often be found in flocks with Bushtits, chickadees, and Ruby-crowned Kinglets. They are generally less active than kinglets, but like kinglets, they flick their wings. They search for prey beneath leaves and hover briefly in front of foliage, picking off food. In summer, they are relatively inconspicuous, and are usually noticed only because of their monotonous, ceaselessly repeated 'zwee-zwee-zwee' song.	Hutton's Vireos eat mostly insects and spiders. They will also eat small fruits, berries, and plant galls.	Uncommon year-round resident and breeder in western counties. Utilizes coniferous and mixed forests below 1,500 feet, particularly at wetland or meadow openings. Penetrates Cascades along riparian corridors. East of Cascades, very rare and local anywhere in state (no confirmed nesting). Single possible BBA record from Kittitas County, singing territorial male along North Fork Wenas Creek on 27 May 1990.	Monogamous pairs form in the early spring and last through the breeding season. Both members of the pair build the nest, a cup suspended from a horizontal forked branch. The nest is made of bark strips, moss, and lichen and lined with fine grass. Spider webs hold the nest together, and plant down and spider egg cases often decorate the outside. Both parents incubate the four eggs for 14 to 16 days. Both feed and tend the young for the 14 to 17 days they are in the nest and for up to three weeks after they leave it. Hutton's Vireos usually raise only one brood a year, occasionally two.	Hutton's Vireo is generally considered the only resident vireo in Washington. There is some seasonal movement, however, with birds appearing in the winter in some areas in which they are not known to breed  (often along lowland streams).	huttons_vireo	HUVI			
485	70	Vireo	olivaceus	Red-eyed Vireo	Fairly common but local summer resident.	LC	Brown-headed Cowbirds frequently lay their eggs in the nests of Red-eyed Vireos. The clearing of eastern forests and those on their wintering grounds in South America has most likely caused some population decline, but the current number in North America appears stable. In Washington, according to the Breeding Bird Survey, Red-eyed Vireos have experienced a significant decline between 1966 and 2000. This decline has most likely resulted from both Brown-headed Cowbird parasitism and the degradation and loss of streamside habitat.	The Red-eyed Vireo is a small bird, olive-green above and pale yellow and white below. It has no wing-bars. It has a rather flat head with a blue-gray crown, bordered below by three stripes: black, white, and black, with the lowest stripe passing through the eye. Although adults have bright red eyes, the color of the eyes is often difficult to detect in the field. The eyes of juveniles are brown, a color that may persist through the first winter.		1	Throughout the eastern United States, Red-eyed Vireos are common in deciduous woodlands. However in Washington they are largely confined to stream and lakeside woodlands and cottonwood stands.	Red-eyed Vireos can be found along streams and in other areas with large cottonwood trees from late May to mid-August. They are more common in eastern Washington, but can be found in western Washington at Fort Lewis (Pierce County), along such rivers as the Nooksack and Nisqually, and along the Columbia River in Clark, Skamania, and Klickitat Counties. They also breed most years at Marymoor Park (King County). The highest densities in western Washington occur along the Snoqualmie and Skagit Rivers. In eastern Washington, they can be seen along rivers in the northeast and southeast, especially in the northeast corner of the state.	Red-eyed Vireos can be difficult to see because they forage high in the canopy, where they pick food from the undersides of foliage, hopping about or hovering in the leaves. During courtship and nesting seasons, their prominent, repeated calls readily reveal their presence.	In summer, Red-eyed Vireos feed mostly on adult insects and larvae, especially caterpillars. In late summer and on their wintering grounds, they also eat berries.	Locally common in riparian woodland, especially tall cottonwoods. In our four-county area largely confined to hardwood stands and riparian corridors in lower foothills of west slope of Cascades and adjacent river valleys, particularly on Sammamish Plateau and in Snoqualmie, White, and Green River Valleys, where quite common. A few BBA records at probable and possible levels in Yakima River Valley between Easton and Thorp in alder and cottonwood stands. Single record of possible nesting from Bainbridge Island may represent non-breeding occurrence.	Like other vireos, Red-eyed Vireos are monogamous. Unlike other Washington vireos, female Red-eyed Vireos build their nests and incubate without assistance from the males. The nest is made of bark, grass, needles, and twigs, lined with soft plant fiber and other material.  It is covered on the outside with wasp nest paper and spider webbing. It is a typical vireo nest, suspended by its rim from a horizontally forked twig or the corner of a tree trunk and two radiating branches. Clutch size is typically three to four eggs, and incubation lasts for 11 to 14 days. Both the male and female feed the young for the 10 to 12 days they are in the nest. The female, and perhaps the male, continue to feed the young for up to two weeks after they leave the nest.	Red-eyed Vireos have expanded into Washington from the East, a route they retrace during migration. They arrive from points east late in spring, at the end of May or the beginning of June. When they leave the state, usually by the end of August, they head east before turning south for wintering grounds in the Amazon Basin.	red-eyed_vireo	REVI			
486	70	Vireo	philadelphicus	Philadelphia Vireo		LC		One record, from Grant County in September.		1								philadelphia_vireo				
487	70	Vireo	solitarius	Blue-headed Vireo		LC		Two fall records, one east and one west.		1								blue-headed_vireo				
488	41	Wilsonia	citrina	Hooded Warbler		LC		In all plumages the back is olive, the underparts are yellow, and the tail has large white spots. The adult male&#8217;s black cap, collar, and throat form a complete &#8220;hood&#8221; around the yellow forehead and face, against which the large, dark eye stands out. The amount of black varies in other plumages, from quite extensive in many adult females to none at all in first-fall females. Some individuals may look rather like Wilson&#8217;s Warbler. However, Wilson&#8217;s is noticeably smaller&#8212;half an inch shorter, one-third lighter in weight, shorter-billed&#8212;and has no white in the tail. The songs are completely dissimilar as well.

The Hooded Warbler nests in moist deciduous and mixed forests from the lower Midwest and southern New England to the Gulf Coast. It is a trans-Gulf migrant, wintering mostly in southeastern Mexico and on the Caribbean slope of northern Central America. It is a casual vagrant in the Pacific Northwest. Washington&#8217;s first record was an adult male that wintered at Discovery Park, Seattle (King County), December 1975&#8211;April 1976. Three later records occurred at Kamiak Butte (Whitman County) in June 1986, Pullman (Whitman County) in December 1989, and Sun Lakes (Grant County) in June 2004. British Columbia has one record in December and another in June, both from the southeast. Idaho has six reports of Hooded Warbler, only one of which has been reviewed by the state bird records committee. Five are from October&#8211;November and the sixth is from June. Oregon has nine records, both spring and fall.

<I>Revised November 2007</I>		1								hooded_warbler				
489	41	Wilsonia	pusilla	Wilson's Warbler	Common summer west. Fairly common east.	LC	In Washington, the Breeding Bird Survey has reported a significant statewide population decline since 1980. Wilson's Warblers are hosts for parasitic Brown-headed Cowbirds, although rates are fairly low in most areas. Pesticides used in clear-cuts have been shown to have negative impacts on Wilson's Warblers. However, habitat degradation, especially in western riparian habitats, is probably the most significant threat to Wilson's Warblers, and is likely the cause of recent population declines in Washington and other western states.	Wilson's Warblers are small, bright yellow birds marked with black. They are bright yellow below, and olive-yellow above. Males have distinctive black caps on top of their heads, and both sexes have large, black eyes that stand out against the bright yellow on their faces. Females and immatures have duller, dark caps. The western Washington breeding race females have dark black caps.		1	Wilson's Warblers breed in wet, shrubby areas within forests. In Washington, they are most often found in small breaks in the forest that have dense, moist, shrubby cover, especially willow and alder thickets. These areas can be natural clearings, wetland edges, avalanche chutes, clear-cuts, or stream corridors. During migration and winter, they use similar habitats.	Two subspecies of Wilson's Warbler breed in Washington: the Pacific Lowland subspecies breeds in western Washington, and the Rocky Mountain subspecies breeds in the northeast corner and the Blue Mountains. Wilson's Warblers are one of the most common breeding warblers in western Washington, and can be found from April to mid-September, with smaller numbers lingering through the end of September. They are less common in eastern Washington, where they are found from May to early August in middle- to high-elevation forests of the Cascades, the northeast corner, and the Blue Mountains. They are common migrants in the lowland forests on the eastern slopes of the Cascades, and in appropriate habitats down to the Columbia Basin in smaller numbers.	Wilson's Warblers are mostly solitary outside the breeding season, but associate with mixed flocks while foraging. They typically glean prey from leaf and twig surfaces, but also catch aerial prey. They forage fairly low, but rarely on the ground, and are very active, hopping from branch to branch.  Wilson's Warblers have a characteristic tail wave or flip. This active hopping, combined with the tail flip, may help with identification.	Wilson's Warblers eat insects and other small invertebrates. They also sometimes eat berries.	Widespread and common in all forested habitats in western counties. Less common in developed lowlands, but may successfully breed in remaining large habitat tracts. Uncommon breeder at moderate elevations in Kittitas County in moist forest along Cascade crest and in dry, open forest farther downslope, where often associated with riparian vegetation. Records difficult to assess in urbanized King County, where good breeding habitat scarce; at least some may represent migrants, as species moves into June and begins dispersal by late July. Same caution applies to Kittitas County, although BBA records there earlier than 1 June have not been mapped.	Wilson's Warblers are primarily monogamous, although some are polygynous, and high rates of extra-pair copulations have been observed. Pacific Lowland populations lay fewer eggs, raise fewer young, and have higher rates of monogamy than populations in the mountains. Lowland populations nest in shrubs, unlike their ground-nesting highland relatives. The female selects the nest site, either sunken in a patch of moss or sedge, or in a low shrub or vine. She builds a bulky open cup of leaves, grass, and moss, lined with grass and hair. The female incubates 2 to 7 eggs for 11 to 13 days, and broods the young for the first few days after they hatch. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest 9 to 11 days after hatching. The parents continue to feed the young for up to 25 days after they fledge.	Wilson's Warblers are Neotropical migrants that winter in the mountains of Mexico and Central America, although small numbers remain in the extreme southern U.S. They migrate at night, alone or in small groups, sometimes mixed with other species.	wilsons_warbler	WIWA			
490	30	Xanthocephalus	xanthocephalus	Yellow-headed Blackbird	Common summer east. Uncommon west and winter.	LC	Despite decreases in some areas, Yellow-headed Blackbirds are widespread and common throughout their range. The major threats to the birds are persecution because of crop damage, pesticides used in the agricultural areas they frequent, and loss of habitat. Their preference for larger, deeper wetlands may help Yellow-headed Blackbirds, because these wetlands may be more resistant to draining, development, and agricultural conversion. Wintering birds are currently increasing in numbers in Washington and the breeding range has expanded into western Washington in recent years.	Yellow-headed Blackbirds are black birds with golden-yellow heads. Adult males have white wing-patches and black masks. First-year males are duller than mature males, with dark smudging on their yellow heads and less white on their wings. Females are considerably smaller than males and have unstreaked, brownish-black bodies, no wing-bars, and yellowish-brown heads. Birds in all plumages have yellow around their vents.		1	During the breeding season, Yellow-headed Blackbirds can be found in large wetlands with emergent vegetation. Their habitat requirements are similar to those of Red-winged Blackbirds, but Yellow-headed Blackbirds require larger wetlands with deeper water. Red-winged Blackbirds are often seen with Yellow-headed Blackbirds. When the two do occur together, the larger Yellow-headed Blackbirds generally inhabit the center of the marsh, and the smaller Red-winged Blackbirds inhabit the periphery. In the non-breeding season, they can be found in open fields.	Yellow-headed Blackbirds are common breeders in wetlands within the steppe zone of eastern Washington from early April to September. They are uncommon but becoming more numerous in this area the rest of the year, especially at feedlots in the Columbia Basin and at Moses Lake. In western Washington, they are becoming more common, but are still patchily distributed. They have bred at Fort Lewis (Pierce County), Deer Lagoon on Whidbey Island (Island County), Ridgefield National Wildlife Refuge (Clark County), and Wiser Lake (Whatcom County). Migrants and non-breeders are often seen in western Washington as well, and may occasionally turn up at the Union Bay Natural Area (the Montlake Fill) in Seattle.	Outside of the breeding season, Yellow-headed Blackbirds are commonly found in flocks, often mixed with other blackbird species. In winter, single-species flocks may form, sometimes consisting of all males or all females. Large foraging flocks move in a rolling fashion: birds from the back of the flock fly over the rest of the flock to the front. They forage by walking on the ground or climbing on low marsh vegetation. They often forage beside bodies of water when insects are emerging from aquatic larval stages, and they follow behind farm machinery, taking advantage of food churned up by the equipment.	In the spring and summer and when feeding young, Yellow-headed Blackbirds eat many insects. The rest of the year they eat seeds and waste grains, and probably two-thirds of their annual diet is seeds and grain.	Fairly common but local in Kittitas County steppe-zone wetlands. Requires larger wetlands with deeper water than Red-winged Blackbirds; however, two species often found together. West of Cascade crest, one small breeding colony at Deer Lagoon on Whidbey Island continues active beyond close of atlas period. Migrants usually recorded sparsely from entire four-county area each year, well into June.	Yellow-headed Blackbirds are polygamous and breed in colonies. Males may have up to 6 mates, but 2 to 3 mates is the norm. Pair bonds last for a single breeding season. The female builds the nest, which is a bulky, open cup made of leaves, stems, and grass, and lashed to cattails, bulrushes, or other plants growing over the water. The female incubates 4 eggs for 12 to 13 days, and broods the young for a few days after hatching. The female provides most of the food for the young, but the male may help feed at one nest. The young leave the nest 9 to 12 days after hatching, but stay nearby, close to the water, until they can fly, about 9 to 12 days later. The female feeds the young for a few days after they fledge. Females typically raise one brood each season but may raise two.	Yellow-headed Blackbirds migrate during the day in loose flocks. Most Yellow-headed Blackbirds arrive on the breeding grounds from April through May, with males arriving before females.  They depart for the wintering grounds from August through September. A few birds winter in Washington but most travel to the southwestern United States and Mexico, and males tend to winter farther north than females.	yellow-headed_blackbird				
491	32	Xema	sabini	Sabine's Gull	Fairly common pelagic migrant. Rare fall inland.	LC	Their remote breeding range and seagoing nature may have protected the population, however the possibility of oil-drilling in the Arctic threatens the Sabine's Gull's nesting habitat. During migration and winter, they are vulnerable to water pollution and fluctuations of prey abundance. Since their winter diet is not well known, more research is needed to fully understand what is necessary for conservation.	The Sabine's Gull is a small gull with a graceful, tern-like flight. This gull has a slate-gray back, a white belly and tail, and black wingtips. The adult has a black bill with a yellow tip. The middle of the wings is white, giving the bird a distinctive 'M' pattern across its wings in flight. In breeding season, the adult has a dark gray hood, edged in black. The adult in non-breeding plumage has a partially gray and white head. The juvenile is brown across the back, neck, and head, with a white face.		1	Sabine's Gulls nest in the high Arctic in marshy tundra ponds close to the coast. Outside the breeding season, they spend most of their time at sea, out of sight of land. When at sea, they concentrate over the continental shelf or over upwellings of cold, nutrient-rich water.	Most records for Sabine's Gulls are offshore, and pelagic birding trips give birders the best chance of spotting them. However, juveniles and adults can both be found inland, and sightings, though rare, are so regular in fall that a small percentage of the population must use an overland migration route. The best time of the year to look for Sabine's Gulls is during migration, when they are common on the open water--May for spring migration and the second half of August and September for fall migration. They are uncommon in June and July, and in October, and very rare or absent the rest of the year. They are occasionally blown towards shore in storms and can sometimes be found in the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Juvenile birds are found inland rarely on both sides of the Cascades.	The Sabine's Gull often hovers low over the water, dropping down to take food from the water's surface without landing. It also forages while swimming. In summer, this gull often feeds by walking along the tidal flats and picking up food. The Sabine's Gull has been known to spin in circles in shallow water, stirring up food from the bottom.	In summer, the Sabine's Gull feeds mostly on insects and aquatic insect larvae. During migration, small crustaceans, fish, and other sea creatures are also part of the diet. Their winter diet is not well known.		Nests are located on the open ground, in small colonies, typically close to the water. Sabine's Gull colonies are often located near or within Arctic Tern colonies. The nest is a shallow depression, sometimes unlined, or lined with seaweed, moss, or feathers. The female typically lays two eggs, which both parents help incubate for about 3½ weeks. Shortly after the young hatch, the parents lead them to water, where they mostly feed themselves.	Sabine's Gulls nest in the high Arctic, migrate south off the Pacific Coast, and spend the winter as far south as Central Chile. The spring migration lasts from early April to early June. Birds start heading south in late July. The peak of the fall Sabine's Gull migration lasts from late August to mid-September.	sabines_gull				
492	17	Zenaida	asiatica	White-winged Dove		LC		This rare visitor from the Southwest is brownish-gray like a Mourning Dove but bulkier and shorter-tailed. The best field marks are the large, white upperwing patches readily visible on the folded wing and in flight, and the memorable, cooing &#8220;who cooks for you&#8221; song.

White-winged Dove is resident from the southern U.S. border and Gulf Coast states through the Bahamas, Greater Antilles, and Mexico to Panama. In recent years it has been extending its range northward and also into the Lesser Antilles. The first Washington record was from the Puyallup River valley (Pierce County) in 1907. The next one occurred ninety years later, at Cypress Island (Skagit County) in 1997, quickly followed by four more from 1999 to 2002. British Columbia shows a similar pattern, with the first record in 1918, then a long gap until the next nine records that fall from 1994 to 2006. Oregon&#8217;s first three records occurred from 1976 to 1986; the next seven were from 1995 to 2005. Idaho has a single accepted record, from 1994; six other, later reports are still under review by the state&#8217;s bird records committee. In the Pacific Northwest, White-winged Doves have been found on both sides of the Cascades and in all months except March and April, but the great majority have occurred in the western lowlands from May to November, frequently along the coast.

<I>Revised July 2007</I>		1								white-winged_dove				
493	17	Zenaida	macroura	Mourning Dove	Common resident east. Uncommon west.	LC	Agricultural practices, development, and forest management have all increased available habitat in western Washington, which has led to a range expansion in this area. In eastern Washington, available breeding habitat has also increased. However, all throughout the state, hunting pressure keeps the population in check.	The Mourning Dove is the most slender of Washington's pigeons and doves. It has a long tail that tapers to a point. Its plumage is brownish gray with a buff-colored belly and wings of light gray. The beak is black, and the legs are orange. Adults have black spots on their wings and a slight iridescence at the nape of the neck. The black eye is surrounded by a light blue eye-ring. Juveniles look much like adults, but their plumage is lightly mottled.		1	Mourning Doves are found in a variety of habitats where open areas and forests meet. They are common in suburban environments and along roadsides, both of which traditionally provide edge habitat. They adapt well to human habitation and thrive in grain-producing fields of eastern Washington.	The Mourning Dove is common and widespread at low elevations throughout eastern Washington, and fairly common but local in western Washington. Some birds may be seen year round on the east and the west sides of the mountains, but they are less common in the winter. Migrants return in March and early April and leave at the end of September.	Mourning Doves forage mostly on the ground, visit bird feeders, and often roost on telephone or power lines. In July and August before migration, they form post-breeding flocks. The Mourning Dove produces a mournful hooting, which is often mistaken for an owl.	Seeds make up 99% of their diet. Mourning Doves swallow grit to help digest hard seeds and grain.	Common and widespread at low and middle elevations throughout Kittitas County from steppe zones into lower dry-forest zones. No BBA records in Wenatchee Mountains at elevations above 3,200 feet, <i>contra</i> predicted range in Washington Gap report (Smith et al. 1997). In western counties, uncommon to locally fairly common at low elevations in open landscapes away from heavily developed urban areas. Utilizes variety of habitats, including towns, semi-rural residential, wetlands, steppe, agriculture, prairies, and clearcuts.	In warm climates, the Mourning Dove is a prolific breeder, producing up to six broods per year, more broods than any other native North American species. In the Pacific Northwest, it has been reported that as many as three broods have been produced in a single season by a single pair. The male leads the female to potential nest sites. When she chooses one, he brings nest materials and she builds the nest, a flimsy platform of twigs. Nests are typically located in a tree or shrub, but may be on the ground, on a building ledge, or other structure. The female lays two eggs, and both parents incubate for two weeks. Both males and females produce in their crops pigeon milk, a protein- and fat-rich liquid, which they feed to their young.  After two weeks, the young leave the nest, although they stay close by and are fed by the parents for another 1-2 weeks.	Some birds remain year round over most of their breeding range, but many move south in the fall, migrating in flocks mostly by day. Migrants arrive on the breeding grounds in March or April, and most leave by October.	mourning_dove	MODO			
494	42	Zonotrichia	albicollis	White-throated Sparrow	Uncommon winter resident, mostly west.	LC	Although the White-throated Sparrow is still widespread and common, with an estimated 10-20 million pairs range-wide, they are declining through much of their breeding range.	The White-throated Sparrow has two color morphs that are equally represented in the population--white-striped and tan-striped. Both varieties have a brown-striped back and a clear, grayish-brown rump and tail. Their wings are brown-streaked with two white wing-bars. White-striped birds have alternating black and white stripes on their head, with white at the crown and above each eye, and yellow patches in front of the eyes. They have bright white throat-patches, clear gray breasts, and white bellies. Tan-striped birds have a similar head pattern, but the white is replaced with tan and the black with brown (with darker streaks). The yellow patches are less distinctive. The throat is still white, but dark streaks descending from each side of the bill split the white into three sections. The breast is more streaked, with less distinction between the breast and belly colors. Most birds seen in Washington are juveniles, which are streaky overall. The juvenile plumage is less brightly colored and streakier than that of the adult, and lasts through the first winter.		1	White-throated Sparrows breed in coniferous and mixed woodlands, especially those with openings and thick undergrowth. Second growth after logging or fire is especially productive breeding habitat. Other openings around beaver ponds, roadsides, and near the treeline are also used. These sparrows migrate through, and winter in, similar edgy habitats with dense understory, including suburban yards and parks, often near water.	White-throated Sparrows are uncommon to rare winter visitors in western Washington from October to April. White-throats are usually found with White-crowned and Golden-crowned Sparrows. They are occasionally sighted east of the Cascades in the winter as well. Numbers fluctuate considerably from year to year.	White-throated Sparrows usually forage on the ground in loose flocks, kicking the leaf litter back with both feet to uncover food. They will come to bird feeders if there is cover nearby. During the breeding season, they sing from trees, although they usually do not sing from very exposed perches. The two color morphs have a number of interesting behavioral differences. Either sex can be white-striped or tan-striped, but they usually pair with a member of the other color morph. Pairs of tan-striped females and white-striped males nest in more open forest and forest edge areas. Pairs of white-striped females and tan-striped males tend to nest in denser forests. Pairs of white-striped females and tan-striped males usually form pair bonds more quickly than the reverse combination. White-striped birds tend to be dominant. White-striped males are usually more aggressive and sing more than tan-striped males. They are also more likely to seek extra-pair copulations than tan-striped males. White-striped females also sing, but their tan-striped counterparts usually do not. Tan-striped adults tend to provide more food and care for the young than white-striped birds.	In fall and winter, the White-throated Sparrow eats small seeds and berries. Insects are a more important food source in the summer, although greens and fruit are still part of the sparrow's diet.		The male sings to defend a territory and attract a mate. Early nests are often in a shrub or on a bracken fern, and later nests are usually on the ground under a shrub, often a blueberry. The female builds the nest, which is an open cup made of grass, twigs, roots, and pine needles, lined with fine grass, rootlets, and hair. The female incubates the 4 to 5 eggs for 11 to 14 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest 8 to 9 days after hatching. The parents continue to feed and tend the young for at least two more weeks. Four to five days after the young fledge, they can make short flights, and within a week they are strong flyers.	Most populations of White-throated Sparrows are migratory, although there is some overlap of breeding and wintering ranges. They arrive on the central Canadian breeding grounds in the spring, soon after the snow has melted enough to expose the forest floor. In the fall, they migrate late, usually not until snow starts to fall. Wintering range is across the southeastern and entire western coast of the United States. Birds that winter on the West Coast probably breed in northern British Columbia, but migration routes are not well documented.	white-throated_sparrow	WTSP			
495	42	Zonotrichia	atricapilla	Golden-crowned Sparrow	Common winter resident west. Uncommon east.	LC	The Golden-crowned Sparrow was considered a pest early in the 20th Century, because flocks would feed on vegetables and flowers in gardens and cultivated fields. Its actual impact was not as great as was originally thought, and it is no longer considered a pest. Its population has grown in the past 30 years, and the Golden-crowned Sparrow is now a more common Washington winter resident than it was 30-50 years ago. Its far-northern breeding grounds are well protected, with many of them located in national parks, forests, and wildlife refuges in the United States and Canada, although continued protection of these federal lands is important to the Golden-crowned Sparrow's continued success.	The Golden-crowned Sparrow has bright breeding plumage with a bright yellow crown flanked with bold, black bars.  The yellow extends to the nape of the neck and then changes to whitish; the black covers the top half of the eye.  The back is light brown with bold stripes. The rump is unstreaked and brownish-gray, with the color extending through the long tail.  The wings are brightly patterned with two white wing-bars. The breast and belly are not streaked.  Non-breeding plumage is more subdued than breeding plumage, with most of the black and white on the head gone, and the yellow a softer shade.  Young birds keep an immature plumage with little or no yellow through their first winter.		1	The subalpine zone, where willow and alder mix with tundra, is the breeding habitat of the Golden-crowned Sparrow.  During the non-breeding season, they are often found in brushy thickets and gardens with White-crowned Sparrows, but are also seen in more forested habitats. Compared to White-crowned Sparrows and Dark-eyed Juncos, Golden-crowned Sparrows tend to occur in damper, less open habitats.	Golden-crowned Sparrows are very rare breeders in remote areas of the North Cascades (Harts Pass), although there is only one confirmed nesting record, from 1956.  Golden-crowned Sparrows are most commonly considered a migrant and wintering bird in Washington, and are one of the most common wintering sparrows in western Washington, especially on the coast and up the Columbia Gorge as far as Lyle.  During migration and in winter, they are occasionally sighted in eastern Washington, usually seen with White-crowned Sparrows. They are rare in the Okanogan Valley and in the lower Columbia Basin, east to the Tri-Cities area.	During migration and winter, Golden-crowned Sparrows often feed in mixed flocks. They feed on the ground out in the open, and retreat to nearby shrubs for shelter or when disturbed.	During the winter they eat the seeds of grasses and weeds, and they may visit birdfeeders. They will also eat buds, flowers, new shoots, and berries. During the summer, insects become a major food source, especially for the young.		The male defends his territory and attracts a mate by singing from an exposed perch.  Pairs are monogamous, and paired birds will forage together during the breeding season. Early in the breeding season, when there may still be snow on the ground, the nests are usually built in trees or shrubs.  Later nests are usually built on the ground, often dug into the ground, or placed in a depression so their rims are even with the ground.  The female probably builds the nest alone. The nest is a bulky cup of twigs, bark, moss, ferns, leaves, and grass, lined with fine grass, hair, and sometimes ptarmigan feathers.  The female incubates the 3 to 5 eggs for 11 to 13 days, and the male may bring her food while she is on the nest.  Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest at 9 to 11 days but are fed by the parents for a while longer.	The entire population of Golden-crowned Sparrows migrates within North America. They leave the breeding grounds late in the fall, most arriving on the wintering grounds throughout California, western Oregon, and western Washington from mid-September through October.  Birds begin to return to the breeding grounds in April or May.	golden-crowned_sparrow	GCSP			
496	42	Zonotrichia	leucophrys	White-crowned Sparrow	Common resident. Uncommon winter east.	LC	Z. l. pugetensis is a common breeding bird throughout the western Washington lowlands. It has expanded its range considerably in the past 30 years, in part due to logging and development, which have increased its habitat.	The White-crowned Sparrow is a distinctive bird with bold black and white stripes on its head.  It has a clear, gray breast and belly, long tail, and wings distinctly marked with two white wing-bars. The beak is orange-yellow to reddish-brown depending on the subspecies.  Young birds are streaked overall until August, when they take on a juvenile plumage similar to the adult; they have brown and tan head stripes rather than black and white, which they keep until the spring.		1	Different subspecies vary in their habitat requirements, but in general they require a patchy mosaic of bare ground and shrubby areas for breeding.  Their territories are usually small, and they will breed in small patches of habitat in the middle of a city. During winter, they move into slightly more open habitats than the related Golden-crowned Sparrow. There are three subspecies of White-crowned Sparrow in Washington.  Z. l. pugetensis occurs in shrubby habitats in cities, recent clear-cuts, wetlands, and alpine parkland.  Z. l. gambelii nests in a variety of habitats, including alpine meadows, grass, and dense shrubs, and is best distinguished from Z. l. pugetensis by its song.  Z. l. oriantha uses sub-alpine and alpine meadows.	As a species, the White-crowned Sparrow is common year round in western Washington.  In the winter, it is one of the most widespread and abundant sparrows in Washington. From September to mid-May it is most common along the Columbia River and its major tributaries, in the interior lowlands of western Washington, and along the outer coastline.  Z. l. pugetensis is common all over western Washington in the right habitat, including high-mountain clear-cuts, city parks, and suburban lawns. It is uncommon and local east of the Cascades, where it has begun to expand its range into Yakima and Kittitas Counties and to Ellensburg, up the Columbia River.  Z. l. oriantha, the easternmost of the subspecies, breeds in subalpine areas and is an uncommon and local breeder in the Blue Mountains and in the mountains of northeastern Washington.In Washington, Z. l. gambelii breeds in habitats similar to those favored by Z. l. oriantha, but is typically found farther west, in the eastern Cascades, and northwestern Okanogan County. It is an abundant migrant throughout Washington, and many of the birds that breed in northwest Canada and Alaska winter in eastern Washington. This bird can be distinguished from the other subspecies by its bolder and brighter plumage.	White-crowned Sparrows are generally found in flocks of their own and other species outside the breeding season.  Flocks of White-crowned Sparrows fan out into open ground away from sheltering bushes as they feed, flying back to cover in a wave if disturbed.  They forage on the ground in open areas, with sheltered thickets nearby for cover.  They use a two-footed scratching maneuver to locate food in the leaf litter.	In the winter, White-crowned Sparrows eat seeds, grass, buds, fruits, and arthropods. During the breeding season, arthropods make up a larger proportion of the diet.	Common and widespread throughout western lowlands in open, scrubby habitats, including cities. Penetrates to higher King County elevations along major river corridors and crosses Cascade crest, frequenting clearcuts, wetland edge, woodlots, farmsteads, and towns down to ponderosa pine zone. Invasion of Kittitas County rapid and of recent date, with Washington's first documented breeding east of crest near Elk Heights in 1988 (Smith et al. 1997). Two subspecies breed in area: <i>Z.l. pugetensis</i> widespread, <i>Z.l. gambelii</i> only at high elevation near Naches Pass (although common migrant). Absent from high, rugged mountains north of Snoqualmie Pass on both sides of crest.	Males generally arrive on the breeding grounds before females. The males sing to defend their territories and attract mates.  The nest is usually located on the ground at the base of a shrub or a clump of grass, in a depression so the rim is level with the ground.  Nests on the West Coast are often placed in a shrub a few feet off the ground.  The female builds the nest, which is an open cup made of grass, sticks, pine needles, rootlets, and bark strips and is lined with fine grass, feathers, and hair.  The female incubates the 3 to 7 eggs for 11 to 14 days. Both parents feed the young, which leave the nest at 8 to 10 days after hatching.  The young begin to fly about 7 to 10 days after leaving the nest and start finding their own food at about that time as well.  The pugetensis subspecies typically raises 2 to 3 broods each year, while the other subspecies usually raise only one.	Many birds go south in the winter, but a number of the gambelii subspecies winter in Washington, migrating from breeding grounds farther north, arriving in mid-August and leaving in mid-March.  Migrants of the gambelii subspecies that nest in Washington start to arrive in early May and leave in late August. During migration, the gambelii is one of the most abundant birds to be found in eastern Washington.  The pugetensis subspecies arrives in early April and leaves in late August.  Oriantha, the third subspecies, arrives in mid-May and leaves in mid-September.  Some high-altitude populations arrive at lower elevations and then head up the slopes as the snow melts.	white-crowned_sparrow	WCSP			
497	42	Zonotrichia	querula	Harris's Sparrow	Rare winter resident, mostly east.	LC	Harris's Sparrows' breeding grounds are very remote; the first nest was not discovered until 1931. This remoteness protects them from human development, and they are quite common within their range. Habitat loss due to fire and the effects of global warming are potential threats. During the 20th Century, they may have expanded their wintering range, perhaps due to feeding stations and the establishment of winter wheat crops in some areas. However, this may actually reflect increased observation levels and more complete information rather than an actual increase. The Harris's Sparrow does not appear in Dawson and Bowles' (1909) book on Washington birds, which may be because they were less common, or because there were fewer people looking for them.	The Harris's Sparrow is the largest sparrow in North America. In breeding plumage, it has a black crown, chin, and upper breast, with gray cheeks and a clear white belly. Its back and wings are heavily streaked, and its bill is pink. Adults in non-breeding plumage have brown rather than gray cheeks. Juveniles are similar in appearance to non-breeding adults, but lack the black face and head.		1	Harris's Sparrows nest in stunted boreal forests, where the northern forest and tundra meet. In winter, they inhabit brushy areas in open woodlands. During migration, they can be seen at woodland edges, in brushy thickets, hedgerows, and shelterbelts.	The Harris's Sparrow is a rare but regular wintering bird in Washington. Although they are more common on the Canadian side, they have shown up on about half of the Christmas Bird Counts in the Okanogan Valley and about 20% of the counts in Spokane. About 70% of Bellingham's Christmas Bird Counts have found a few Harris's Sparrows. Throughout the rest of western Washington, they are rare, with a few sightings reported each winter, from October through early May.	Harris's Sparrows will flock in late summer before migration starts. They sometimes flock with other species, especially other sparrows and Dark-eyed Juncos. In winter, these flocks feed on the ground near brushy places and will fly up to the tops of thickets when they are disturbed.	During the fall, winter, and spring, Harris's Sparrows eat mostly plant matter, including seeds, berries, flowers, and spruce needles. In summer, they also eat insects and other arthropods.		The male defends a territory and attracts a mate by singing. Males and females generally arrive on the breeding grounds at the same time, and monogamous pairs form soon after their arrival. The nest is located in a small depression on the ground on a small hummock, hidden under a birch, alder, spruce, or other shrub or small tree. The female builds the nest, which is an open cup of lichen, moss, and twigs, lined with fine grass and hair. The female incubates 3-5 eggs for 12-14 days. Both parents help feed the young, which leave the nest 8-10 days after hatching. The young cannot fly when they fledge, but start to fly short distances about four days after fledging. The parents continue to feed the young for about two weeks after fledging.	Harris's Sparrows leave the nesting area by early September and travel slowly to wintering grounds, arriving mostly in November. They winter in the central Great Plains region from South Dakota to Texas. They start moving north at the end of February, but the bulk of the population doesn't arrive on the breeding grounds until late April or early May.	harriss_sparrow				